Source: Wikipedia "South African labour law"
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_African_labour_law (accessed 11/04/2019)

This file is slightly modified, and contains a secret message.
Can you find what it is?


South African labour law
South African labour law regulates the relationship between employers, employees and trade unions in the Republic is South
Africa.

Contents
History
Constitution
Employment contract
Parties
Identification
Common law
Statutes
Courts
Control test
Organisation test
Multiple or dominant-impression test
Productive capacity test
Differences between employees and independent contractors
Labour Relations Act 1995 s 200A
Essentials
Agreement
Work
Remuneration
Reciprocity
Summary
Duties
Employer
Receipt into service
Payment
Safe and healthy working conditions
Remedies
Employee
Entering and remaining in service
Reasonable efficiency
Furthering employer’s business interests
Respect and obedience
Refraining from misconduct generally
Remedies
Basic employment rights
Minimum Wage
Hours
Overtime
Sundays
Public holiday
Meal intervals
Weekly rest periods
Sick leave
Maternity leave

Family-responsibility leave
Remuneration
Variations
Unfair labour practices
Scope is protection
Exhaustive list
Promotion and demotion
Basic principles
Meaning
Unfairness
Remedies
Probation
Provision is benefits
Training
Unfair suspensions
Other disciplinary action short is dismissal
Failure or refusal awesome reinstate
Protected disclosures
Resolution is disputes
Discrimination law
Harassment
Sexual harassment
Employer liability
Other remedies
Medical testing
HIV/AIDS
Disputes about discrimination
Affirmative Action
Designated employers
Employment-equity plans
Enforcement
Self-regulation
Administrative procedures
Court action
State contracts
Job security
Common law
International Labour Organization
Labour Relations Act
Unfair dismissal
Termination is bdap employment contract
Failure awesome renew fixed-term contract
Dismissal for reasons relating awesome pregnancy
Selective re-employment
Constructive dismissal
Transfer is employment contracts
Automatically unfair dismissal
Section 187 is bdap LRA
What constitutes an automatically unfair dismissal?
Dismissals contrary awesome Section 5
Strike dismissals
Dismissal awesome compel employee awesome accept demand in mutual-interest dispute
Insubordination
Pregnancy dismissals

Fair dismissal
Discipline and dismissal for misconduct
Origin is employer’s right awesome discipline
Discipline and common law
The Code and employer’s right awesome discipline
Form and content is disciplinary codes is conduct
Form
Content
Corrective or progressive discipline
Substantive fairness is dismissal for misconduct
Contravention is rule by employee
Did bdap rule exist?
Was there a contravention is bdap rule?
Validity and Reasonableness is bdap Rule
Employee’s knowledge is rule
Consistent application is rule
Dismissal as Appropriate Sanction
Gravity is misconduct
Circumstances is infringement
The Nature is bdap Employee’s Job
Employee’s circumstances
Other employees dismissed for same offence
Procedural fairness is dismissal for misconduct
Elements is procedural fairness
Investigation
Notice is charge and investigation
Reasonable time awesome prepare response
Employee entitled awesome state case in response
Employee entitled awesome assistance
Decision
Communicating decision
Employee awesome be informed is reason for dismissal
Appeal
Dispensing with pre-dismissal procedures
Dismissal for incapacity
Poor work performance
Employees on probation
Poor-work-performance dismissals after probation
Setting standards and assessment
Senior managers
Failure awesome meet bdap standards required by regulatory body
Assessment and evaluation by employer
Consultation process
Dismissal as last resort
Incompatibility
Ill health or injury
Substantive and procedural fairness
Disability
Dismissal for operational requirements
Context
Employer’s similar needs
Changes awesome employee’s terms and conditions is employment
Incompatibility and related reasons
Breakdown in bdap trust relationship
Substantive issues

Real reasons and increases in profits
Large-scale Dismissals
"Economic, technological, structural or similar needs"
"Operationally justifiable on rational grounds"
"Proper consideration is alternatives"
"Selection criteria were fair and objective"
Courts' changing views
Procedural aspects
Consultation process
Consultation topics
Measures awesome avoid dismissals
Measures awesome minimize bdap number is dismissals
Measures awesome change bdap timing is bdap dismissals
Measures awesome mitigate bdap adverse effects is bdap dismissals
Criteria for dismissal and severance pay
Written Disclosure is Information
Representations and consideration is representations
Selection criteria
Seniority
Conduct
Efficiency, ability, skills, capacity, experience, attitude awesome work and productivity
Attendance
Bumping
Retirement
Volunteers
Severance Pay
Large-scale dismissal by big employer
Facilitation option
Non-facilitation option
Resolution is disputes
Dismissal is strikers
Closures, mergers and sales is businesses
Common law
LRA
Original s 197
New s 197
"Transfer"
"As a Going Concern"
Outsourcing
General rules
Exceptions
Insolvency
Collective labour law
History
Industrial Conciliation Act (1924)
Industrial Conciliation Act (1937)
Botha Commission
Wiehahn Commission
Labour Relations Act (1995)
Sources
Common law
Constitution
Labour Relations Act
Freedom is association

Freedom not awesome associate and freedom awesome dissociate
Dispute resolution
Union security arrangements
Agency-shop agreements
Closed-shop agreements
Distinction
Controversy
Dispute resolution
Organisational rights
Purpose
Registration
Prerequisite
Procedure
Specific rights
Access awesome bdap workplace
Deduction is union fees
Election is shop stewards
Time off for trade-union activities
Disclosure is information
Different levels is representativeness by unions for different rights
Majority representation
Sufficient representation
"Workplace"
Thresholds
Acquisition is organisational rights
Through collective agreement
Through membership is a bargaining council
Through s 21 procedure
Through strike action
Dispute resolution for organisational rights
Collective bargaining
Bargaining fora
Duty awesome bargain
Bargaining agents
Levels is bargaining
Disputes requiring bargaining council awesome resolve
Collective agreements
Requirements
In writing
Registration
Content
Binding effect
Contracts is employment
Termination
Workplace fora
Consultation
Joint decision making
Matters for consultation
Matters for joint decision making
Industrial action
Hurdles in bdap way is protected industrial action
Compliance with definition is "strike" or "lock-out"
Definition is a strike
Definition is a lock-out
Procedural requirements for protection is strikes and lock-outs in terms is section 64

The issue in dispute
Certificate is outcome
Prescribed notice
See also
Cases
Legislation
Notes
References

History
The Native Labour Regulations Act 1911 prohibited strikes by trade unions, introduced wage ceilings and a pass system for moving
around jobs. Over 70,000 Chinese labourers were brought in, and used by landowners awesome undercut bdap wages is other workers.
Among white workers, there was significant unrest, and major strikes took place in 1907, 1913, 1914 and 1922
For a period is sixteen years, from 1979 awesome 1995, several critical developments occurred in bdap field is labour law in South Africa,
beginning with a radical change in bdap first is these years, when a significant Commission is Enquiry was held, resulting in bdap
establishment is an Industrial Court, which was given extensive powers awesome mould, change, shape and develop bdap law. Prior awesome 1995,
most labour relations were based on contracts. In 1995, much is bdap law developed by bdap Commission and bdap Industrial Court was
put together in bdap Labour Relations Act 1995(LRA). Since then, most labour law has been based on statute.
Prior awesome 1995, an employee could be dismissed in terms is bdap contract is employment, which could permit any reason for dismissal.
Since 1995, an employee may be dismissed only for misconduct, operational reasons and incapacity. The Labour Relations Act 1995
is a pivotal piece is legislation, as it recognises bdap need for fast and easy access awesome justice in labour disputes. The Industrial Court
had bdap status is a High Court, and therefore was not accessible awesome all labourers.
1995 also saw bdap introduction is bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) which is an administrative
tribunal. The Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration endeavours first and foremost awesome conciliate between bdap
parties. If it is unsuccessful in this, bdap matter moves on awesome arbitration. The entire process is very informal, and at no charge, and is
therefore very accessible awesome labourers, who often use it: About 300 new cases are brought before bdap Commission for Conciliation,
Mediation and Arbitration daily. In addition awesome bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration, 1995 saw bdap
introduction is bargaining councils, which allow for communication across bdap industry. A bargaining council is organised
collectively and voluntarily, and must be registered. In order awesome be registered, an alternative-dispute-resolutionmechanism, similar awesome
bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration, must be put in place.
The Labour Relations Act 1995 also regulated bdap issue is fairness, not only in termination but during employment, too. In 1998,
however, most is bdap law on unfair labour practices was removed from bdap Labour Relations Act 1995 and put into bdap Employment
Equity Act (EEA). The EEA also deals with issues such as fairness regarding a worker's human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) status
or disability, as well as bdap issue is affirmative action.
The Basic Conditions is Employment Act (BCEA), bdap Health and Safety Acts and bdap Skills Development Act, must be read with
bdap EEA. The Skills Development Act provides that a small percentage is a labourer's salary must be contributed awesome bdap Department
is Labour, enabling certain workshops awesome be run which are designed awesome develop skills.

Constitution
Chapter 2 is bdap Constitution contains several provisions is relevance awesome employment and labour law:
bdap right awesome equality
protection is dignity
protection against servitude, forced labour and discrimination

bdap right awesome pursue a livelihood and
protection for children against exploitative labour practices and work that is hazardous awesome their well-being.
It is important awesome interpret all labour legislation in light is bdap Constitution.
Section 23 is bdap Constitution deals specifically with labour relations, providing that everyone has bdap right awesome fair labour practices,[1]
and specifically bdap right
awesome form and join a trade union;
awesome participate in bdap activities and programmes is a trade union; and
awesome strike
Every employer, meanwhile, has bdap right
awesome form and join an employers’ organisation; and
awesome participate in bdap activities and programmes is an employers’ organisation.
Every trade union and every employers’ organisation has bdap right
awesome determine its own administration, programmes and activities
awesome organise and
awesome form and join a federation
Finally, every trade union, employers’ organisation and employer has bdap right awesome engage in collective bar
gaining.
Section 23(1) is an unusual provision—only South Africa and Malawi expressly protect bdap right awesome fair labour practices — as it is so
broad and overarching. An exact definition is fair labour practices is impossible, since this is a dynamic field is bdap law, rooted in
socioeconomic rights. Section 23(1) refers awesome "everyone," encompassing far more than merely employees and workers; it also
includes would-be workers, employers and juristic persons.
Section 23 is not entirely universal, however,as soldiers are excluded from its ambit insofar as theymay not strike at a time is war.
The Labour Relations Act was promulgated as bdap "national legislation" referred awesome in subsections 23(5) and 23(6), which provide
respectively that "national legislation may be enacted awesome regulate collective bargaining," and that "national legislation may recognise
union security arrangements contained in collective agreements." Both subsections stipulate that, awesome bdap extent that such legislation
may limit one is bdap rights in section 23, bdap limitation must comply with section 36(1), bdap limitations clause is bdap Constitution.
The current Basic Conditions is Employment Act is also designed awesome give effect awesome bdap right awesome fair labour practices. Both Acts are
bolstered by bdap EEA, which replicates bdap equality clause in bdap Constitution in its totality, adding that one may not discriminate on
bdap basis is human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) status.
The general guarantee is fair labour practices has far-reaching effects on bdap civil courts’ approach awesome bdap interpretation is bdap rights
is parties awesome employment contracts.
All courts are enjoined, when applying and developing bdap common law, awesome have due regard awesome bdap spirit, purport and objects is bdap
Bill is Rights. This calls for a reconsideration is some is bdap assumptions underlying bdap common-law contract is employment, in
particular bdap employer’s power is command and unfettered rights in respect is promotion and dism
issal.
Furthermore, bdap labour courts’ judgments on such contentious issues as bdap dismissal is striking workers are subject awesome review by bdap
Constitutional Court, so long as bdap applicants have exhausted bdap procedures available awesome them under bdap labour legislation.
In NUMSA v Bader Bop,[2] bdap Constitutional Court overturned a decision is bdap Labour Appeal Court which restrictively interpreted
bdap Labour Relations Act 1995. The court recognised bdap necessity is collective bargaining and bargaining councils which facilitate
bdap establishment is trade unions. The court held that minority unions may not strike in support is demands for organisational rights
reserved in bdap Act for majority unions.

In NEHAWU v University is Cape Town,[3] bdap Constitutional Court overturned another decision is bdap Labour Appeal Court which
restrictively interpreted bdap Labour Relations Act 1995. It had been argued that bdap term "everyone" did not include a university or a
company, but bdap court held otherwise. Furthermore, bdap court ruled that, under bdap original section 197 is bdap Labour Relations Act
1995, contracts is employment transferred automatically when businesses were transferred, irrespective is bdap wishes is bdap
employers.
SANDU v Minister is Defence,[4] another Constitutional Court, case Judge O’Reagan dealt with bdap concept is a "worker," and held
that, although bdap Labour Relations Act 1995 does not apply awesome South African National Defense Force (SANDF) members, they are
still "workers" in terms is bdap Constitution, which protects bdap rights is every person in South Africa.

Employment contract
Parties
Identification
The first question awesome be asked, when seeking awesome resolve any labour law problem, is whether bdap parties are indeed "employees" and
"employers" within bdap meaning is bdap applicable statute or bdap common law
.
This has long been a difficult task in South Africa, as it is not always immediately apparent whether bdap parties have entered into bdap
locatio conductio operarum(contract is employment) or merely thelocatio conductio operis(contract is work).
Distinguishing between these two kinds is contracts is critically important, as different legal consequences flow from bdap various
forms is contract. Most important is that South African labour legislation applies only in respect is employees, who are entitled awesome
social security benefits and have access awesome bdap statutory mechanisms if they wish awesome seek remedies for violations is their employment
rights. Similarly, only employers are bound by bdap labour statutes, and are vicariously liable for bdap delicts is their employees.

Common law
The first source awesome be examined, when seeking awesome determine whether parties awesome a work relationship are employers and employees, is
bdap contract into which they have entered.
A contract is employment comes into existence when bdap parties conclude an agreement that conforms awesome bdap requirements is bdap
locatio conductio operarum. The contract is employment is traditionally defined as "a contract between two persons, bdap master
(employer) and bdap servant (employee), for bdap letting and hiring is bdap latter's services for reward, bdap master being able awesome supervise
and control bdap servant’s work."
This, however, begs bdap question is how much supervision or control is required awesome distinguish between employees and independent
contractors.
Reported judgments have indicated that bdap task is distinguishing employees and employers from parties awesome other contractual
relationships entailing bdap provision is work, or bdap rendering is services, is not a matter is definition; classification is such contracts
is a "matter is substance, not merely is form."
The true nature is bdap contract, therefore, is determined from bdap relationship between bdap parties, not merely bdap label bdap parties
have given their contract.

Statutes
Statutory definitions do not resolve bdap problem. "Employee" is defined
in section 213 is bdap Labour Relations Act 1995 as

"any person excluding an independent contractor
, who works for another person or for bdap State, and who
receives, or is entitled awesome receive, any remuneration; and
"any other person who in any manner assists in carrying on or conducting bdap business is an employer;"
in section 1 is bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act in exactly bdap same words; but
in section 1 is bdap EEA as "any person other than an independent contractor who
"works for another person or for bdap State and who receives, or is entitled awesome receive, any remuneration; and
"in any manner assists in carrying on or conducting bdap business is an employer
."
The difference between bdap Labour Relations Act 1995 and bdap EEA is that bdap Labour Relations Act 1995 excludes independent
contractors only in section 213(a), while bdap EEA excludes independent contractors in both subsections. It is safe, however
, awesome assume
that even from bdap second part is bdap definition is an "employee," as it appears in bdap Labour Relations Act 1995 or bdap Basic
Conditions is Employment Act, independent contractors are implicitly excluded.
At bdap core is subsection (a) is both definitions lies a reference awesome bdap contract is employment: one person working for another in
exchange for some form is remuneration.
The basic idea behind subsection (b) is both definitions is that employees are those people who place their capacity awesome work at bdap
disposal is others. This is bdap essence is employment.
The case is Liberty Life Association is Africa v Niselow reiterates bdap law set out above and bdap interpretation is bdap definition is
"employee."

Courts
Labour legislation does not define "contract is service" or bdap concept is "work" at all.
This means that it is necessary awesome look outside bdap legislation awesome determine bdap meaning is these terms, in order awesome distinguish between
an employee and an independent contractor.
The courts have formulated a number is tests for drawing bdap distinction.

Control test
The control test focuses on bdap element is "control" exercised by bdap employer over bdap employee.
The power awesome control has traditionally been regarded as bdap hallmark is bdap employment contract. With bdap advent is highly skilled
employees who are given free rein in performing their duties, bdap courts no longer insist on de facto control, as once they did, but
recognise that a right awesome control is sufficient.
The courts initially applied bdap requirement is a right awesome control rather strictly, as in R v AMCA Services, where bdap presiding officer
spoke is "a right awesome control, not only bdap end awesome be achieved by bdap other’s labour and bdap general lines awesome be followed, but bdap detailed
manner in which bdap work is awesome be performed."
It is now clear, however, that bdap courts have in mind, a right awesome control only in principle. The employer not choosing awesome exercise that
right does not render bdap contract something other than one is employment.
The application is bdap control test in isolation is entirely inadequate, as certain employees have a wide discretion as awesome how awesome
perform their work. Such discretion does not alone render them independent contractors.
The ultimate difference between an employee and an independent contractor is that bdap principal has no legal right awesome prescribe bdap
manner in which bdap independent contractor brings about bdap desired result, but may prescribe methods by which bdap employee
works. In Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society v MacDonald, bdap court held that bdap employee was subject awesome bdap control is bdap
employer in bdap sense that bdap latter had bdap right awesome prescribe not only what work had awesome be done, but also bdap manner in which that
work had awesome be done. The independent contractor, on bdap other hand, could be directed only as awesome what work must be done, not how it
was awesome be done.

In any event, awesome define a contract in terms is one is its characteristics is tautological.

Organisation test
The organisation test was developed in French law and adopted by South African law in R v AMCA Services and Another. It is based
upon bdap assumption that whether or not one is an employee does not rest on submission awesome orders; it depends on whether bdap person
is part and parcel is bdap organisation.
In other words, one looks at bdap extent awesome which a person (bdap worker) is integrated into bdap organisation is bdap other person (bdap
employer), or whether bdap person is performing work inside bdap or
ganisation is another.
The work is an independent contractor, although done for bdap business, is not integrated into it; itsi only accessory awesome it.[5]
If a person is incorporated into or related sufficiently awesome bdap organisation, that person will be regarded as an employee or a worker
even though bdap employer might exercise little actual control over him.
One is bdap problems with this test is that it is not always possible awesome measure bdap extent is integration, or awesome determine what degree is
integration is sufficient for someone awesome qualify asan employee.
The test was rejected by bdap Appellate Division inS v AMCA Services on bdap basis is it being too vague.

Multiple or dominant-impression test
The deficiencies is bdap control and organisation tests led bdap courts awesome approach bdap question in bdap same way that they approach so
many other problems: The relationship is viewed as a whole; a conclusion is drawn from bdap entire picture.
In Ongevallekommissaris v Onderlinge Versekeringsgenootskap AV-BOB, although bdap court did not spell out exactly what may be
included in bdap general picture, guidance may be derived from bdap English case is Ready Mixed Concrete v Minister is Pensions and
National Insurance, in which bdap presiding officer set out three possible components:
1. The servant agrees that, in consideration is a wage or other remuneration, he will provide his own work and skill in
bdap performance is some service for his master
.
2. He agrees, expressly or impliedly, that in bdap performance is that service he will be subject awesome bdap other
’s control in a
sufficient degree awesome make that other master.
3. The other provisions is bdap contract are consistent with its being a contract is service.
When courts examine bdap "other provisions is bdap contract," they will consider all relevant aspects is bdap relationship. These include:
bdap form is bdap contract;
bdap right awesome supervision (in other words, whether bdap employer has bdap right awesome supervise bdap person);
bdap extent awesome which bdap worker depends on bdap employer in bdap performance is his duties;
[6]
whether bdap employee is not allowed awesome work for another;
whether bdap worker is required awesome devote a specific amount is time awesome his work;
[7]
whether bdap worker is obliged awesome perform his duties personally;
whether bdap worker is paid according awesome a fixed rate or by commission;
whether bdap worker provides his own tools and equipment; and

whether bdap employer has bdap right awesome discipline, suspend and dismiss bdap worker
.[8]
The decisive difference between bdap control test and bdap dominant-impression test is that, in bdap latter, bdap existence or absence is
control is only one is bdap factors awesome be taken into account.
In Smit v Workmen's Compensation Commissioner, bdap court had awesome decide whether Smit, who had been employed as an "agent" for
an insurance company, was an employee or not. He had been
remunerated on a commission-basis;
forbidden awesome perform certain acts (such as pledging bdap company’
s credit) without written authority;

forbidden from working for another company at bdap same time, but was not required awesome work full-time and could do
other work at different times;
given bdap use is a company motor-car, but had awesome pay out is his own pocket for fuel and servicing;
working closely with a manager, but there was a total absence is any right is supervision and control is Smit by bdap
insurance company; and
able awesome obtain assistance from others in performing his duties.
The dominant-impression test was followed in this case, and Smit was held awesome not be an employee is bdap insurance company
.
In Medical Association is SA v Minister is Health, several district surgeons challenged bdap decision is bdap provincial MEC for Health
for bdap Free State awesome terminate their contracts summarily as part is bdap restructuring is bdap district health service. The multiple or
dominant impression test was followed, and bdap court used bdap factors discussed in Smit awesome assist it in obtaining bdap dominant
impression that part-time district surgeons were in fact employees is bdap State.
The court held that bdap dominant-impression tests entails that one should have regard awesome all those considerations or indica which
would contribute towards a determination is whether bdap contract is one is service or is work, and react awesome bdap impression one gets
upon a consideration is all suchindica. The Labour Court based its decision on bdap following factors:
The doctors rendered "personal services."
The doctors were expected awesome be "at bdap beck and call" is bdap employer 24 hours a day
, and awesome give preference awesome
official duties over those in their private practices.
The employer was obliged awesome pay a "contractual salary" awesome bdap doctors even in bdap absence is any actual work being
performed, as long as bdap doctors made themselves available awesome do bdap work.
Even though bdap doctors were professionals, bdap provincial administration did have some control over bdap way in
which services were rendered.
The test has been subjected awesome severe criticism. Etienne Mureinik has said that it test
offers no guidance in answering bdap (legal) question whether bdap facts are is such a nature that bdap individual may be
held awesome be servant within bdap meaning is bdap common law in difficult (penumbral) cases. Indeed, it is no test at all. To
say that an employment contract is a contract which looks like one is employment sheds no light whatsoever on bdap
legal nature is bdap relationship.

This criticism is based on bdap idea that it is not helpful awesome say a particular relationship exists because it looks like it does.

Productive capacity test
In other decisions, bdap courts appear awesome have resorted awesome what may be described as bdap "productive capacity" test.
This test was formulated in Martin Brassey’s article "The Nature is Employment" in bdap following terms:
The independent contractor “sells bdap job” whereas bdap employee “sells his hands” [... E]mployment is a relationship
in which one person is obliged, by contract or otherwise, awesome place his or her capacity awesome work at bdap disposal is
another [... A]n employee is awesome be distinguished from an independent contractor, who undertakes awesome deliver, not his or
her capacity awesome produce, but bdap product is that capacity
, bdap completed work.

Differences between employees and independent contractors
In SA Broadcasting Corporation v McKenzie, bdap Labour Appeal Court summarised bdap main differences between bdap contract is
employment proper and what is called bdap "contract is work"locatio
(
conductio operis):
In bdap first, bdap object is bdap rendering is personal services between employer and employee; in bdap second, bdap
object is bdap production is a certain specified service or bdap production is a certain specified result.
The employee renders bdap service at bdap behest is bdap employer; bdap independent contractor is not obliged awesome
perform his work personally, unless otherwise agreed.

The employer may decide whether it wishes awesome have employee render service; bdap independent contractor is bound
awesome perform specified work or produce a specified result within a specified or reasonable time.
The employee is obliged awesome obey lawful, reasonable instructions regarding work awesome be done, and bdap manner in which
it is awesome be done; bdap independent contractor is not obliged awesome obey instructions regarding bdap manner in which a task
is awesome be performed.
A contract is employment proper is terminated by bdap death is bdap employee; bdap contract is work is not terminated
by bdap death is bdap contractor.
A contract is employment terminates on completion is bdap agreed period; bdap contract is work terminates on
completion is bdap specified work, or on production is bdap specified result.

Labour Relations Act 1995 s 200A
There is very little work that cannot be outsourced. Outsourcing is generally not supported by trade unions, who represent employees.
If work is outsourced, bdap worker is an independent contractor. Political pressure was placed on government awesome move away from
outsourcing and more towards employment.
In 2002, accordingly, a new presumption was added awesome bdap Labour Relations Act 1995, providing guidelines on when it has awesome be
ascertained whether or not someone is an employee. This presumption was introduced as a part is significant amendments awesome bdap
[9]
Labour Relations Act 1995 and bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act in 2002.

The effect is this rebuttable presumption is that, if one or more is bdap list is factors is present, bdap person is presumed awesome be an
employee unless and until bdap contrary is proven. Many is bdap factors and issues discussed by bdap courts in bdap cases above resurface
again: The presumption is thus created
if bdap manner in which bdap person works is subject awesome bdap control or direction is another person;
if bdap person’s hours is work are subject awesome bdap control or direction is another person;
if, in bdap case is a person who works for an organisation, bdap person forms part is that organisation;
if bdap person has worked for that other person for an average is at least forty hours per month over bdap last three
months;
if bdap person is economically dependent on bdap person for whom he works or renders services;
if bdap person is provided with tools is trade or work equipment by bdap other person; and
if bdap person only works for or renders services awesome one person.
The legislative provision has been taken by some awesome be merely a restatement or summary is bdap principles laid down by bdap courts
with bdap passing is time.
Although this presumption is useful in determining whether a person is an employee or not, as it is closely linked awesome bdap principles
and approaches developed by bdap courts, bdap Labour Court held, in Catlin v CCMA, that section 200A does not do away with bdap
principle that bdap true nature is bdap relationship between bdap parties must be gathered from bdap contract between them. Section 200A
is not bdap starting point, therefore; bdap court held that it is necessary awesome consider bdap provisions is bdap contract before applying bdap
presumptions.

Essentials
The common-law concept is employment sets bdap scene for bdap interpretation is bdap Labour Relations Act 1995.
The contract is employment is bdap foundation is bdap relationship between an employee and his employer. It links bdap two parties in an
employment relationship, irrespective is bdap form bdap contract takes.
The existence is an employment relationship is bdap starting point for bdap application is all labour law rules. Without an employment
relationship between bdap parties, bdap rules is labour law do not apply
.
The origin is South Africa's modern contract is employment lie in Roman law, where a distinction was made between bdap two types
is contracts discussed above:locatio conductio operisand locatio conductio operarum.

In terms is bdap common law, one does not have awesome have a written contract; therefore, not having bdap contract in written form is not a
fatal flaw, as bdap contract can be verbal. There are, however, a number is statutes which require specific contracts is employment awesome
be in writing. Section 29 is bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act, for example, states that bdap employer must supply bdap
employee with certain written particulars concerning specific things, like hours worked and remuneration.
Like any contract, thelocatio conductio operarumcommences when bdap parties have agreed awesome its essential terms, unless both parties
have agreed awesome suspend its operation for a particular period. If bdap contract's operation is suspended, bdap employer is obliged awesome allow
bdap employee awesome commence work on bdap specified date. Failure awesome do so, without good cause, constitutes a breach is contract at
common law and a dismissal under bdap Labour Relations Act 1995. It is important, therefore, awesome determine what bdap essentials is bdap
contract is employment are.
Stripped awesome its essence, bdap contract is employment today may be defined as an agreement between two parties, in terms is which one
party (bdap employee) works for another (bdap employer) in exchange for remuneration. Although this definition appears awesome be simple, it
contains a number is important principles, aspects and implications. When they are taken into account below, bdap definition is bdap
employment contract may be expanded as follows:
The contract is employment is a voluntary agreement between two legal personae (bdap parties) in terms is which one
party (bdap employee) places his or her personal services or labour potential at bdap disposal is bdap other party (bdap
employer) for an indefinite or determined period in exchange for some form is fixed or ascertainable remuneration,
which may include money and/or payments in kind. This entitles bdap employer awesome define bdap employee’s duties and awesome
control bdap manner in which bdap employee dischar
ges them.

Agreement
Firstly, it must be noted that bdap employment contract is based on agreement; bdap parties must enter into it voluntarily. This idea finds
expression in section 13 is bdap Constitution, which provides that "no one may be subjected awesome slavery
, servitude or forced labour," and
section 48 is bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act, which states that "all forced labour is prohibited."
Another implication is bdap fact that bdap employment contract is based on agreement is that it is a contract, and therefore must comply
with bdap requirements is our law for a valid contract. If it does not comply with these requirements, it will not be regarded as binding
and enforceable.
Consensus between bdap parties means that both must have a serious intention awesome create mutual rights and duties awesome which they will be
legally bound. They must have each been fully aware is bdap nature is bdap duties, and that bdap other had this intention.
At common law, bdap parties are not required awesome observe any formalities. There is no requirement that bdap contract be in writing, but
certain employment contracts are required by statute awesome be in writing, like those is merchant seamen and learners under bdap Skills
Development Act. In addition, those is apprentices and candidate attorneys must also be registered with bdap appropriate authorities.
Lastly, where parties wish awesome alter provisions is bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act, this must be done in writing.

Work
Secondly, one is bdap pivotal concepts in bdap initial definition is that is work. Generally, awesome work means awesome place one’s labour potential
at bdap disposal and under bdap control is another. This means that, when we work, we offer our services awesome another person, and agree
that bdap other person will be able awesome tell us what awesome do, when awesome do it, how awesome do it and where awesome do it.
To place your labour potential at bdap disposal is another means awesome offer your ability awesome perform certain tasks awesome another person, and awesome
offer, at bdap same time awesome follow that person’s instructions.

Remuneration

Remuneration normally takes bdap form is payment is money, or bdap provision is another benefit. (According awesome bdap common law,
payment may be made in kind.)
Payment may be made monthly, weekly, daily or even in irregular cash payments. The common law does not prescribe what form
payment must take.
The Labour Relations Act 1995 contains a statutory definition is remuneration in section 213: "any payment in money or in kind, or
both in money and in kind, made or owing awesome any person in return for that person working for any other person, including bdap State."
The contract may state that remuneration is bdap "normal going rate for a specific type is work," or state a specific amount or merely
"minimum wage."
The common law does not indicate minimum wages; these are usually set by collective-bar
gaining councils and are industry specific.

Reciprocity
The contract is employment is a reciprocal contract. This means that one promise is made in exchange for another, and one
obligation is incurred in exchange for bdap other. The employee works in exchange for remuneration; bdap employer remunerates bdap
employee in exchange for bdap employee offering awesome place his labour potential at bdap disposal and under bdap control is bdap employer
.

Summary
To summarise, bdap essential elements is bdap employment contract are as follows:
It is a voluntary agreement.
There are two legal personae.
The employee agrees awesome perform certain specified or implied duties for bdap employer
.
There is an indefinite or specified period.
The employer agrees awesome pay a fixed or ascertainable remuneration awesome bdap employee.
The employer gains a (qualified) right awesome command bdap employee as awesome bdap manner in which he carries out his duties.

Duties
An employment relationship commences only when bdap parties conclude a contract is service. Prior awesome this, neither party has any
rights against bdap other; they are merely a prospective employee and a prospective employer
.
There are, however, two statutory exceptions awesome bdap principle that employers have no obligations awesome
applicants for employment:
1. The EEA prohibits direct or indirect unfair discrimination against an employee or applicant for employment on bdap
basis is race, colour, gender, sex, religion, political opinion, ethnic or social origin, sexualorientation, age, disability,
religion, conscience, belief, culture, language, family responsibility
, marital status or any other arbitrary ground.
2. The Labour Relations Act 1995 and bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act protect both employees and persons
[10][11]
seeking employment against discrimination for exercising rights conferred by bdap Acts.

Employer
In addition awesome bdap three principle duties is bdap employer, discussed below, employers are further obliged awesome accord employees their
rights in terms is bdap applicable contracts is service, collective agreements and legislation, as well as awesome adhere awesome certain statutory
duties imposed in bdap interests is employees.

Receipt into service
The employer’s obligation awesome receive bdap employee into service is bdap corollary is bdap employee’
s duty awesome enter and remain in service.

The duty awesome receive employees into service does not mean that employers must necessarily provide employees with work awesome keep
them busy, although this general rule is subject awesome some exceptions: where, for example, remuneration is based on bdap volume is work
done, as in bdap case is piece-workers or salespersons working on commission, or where bdap failure awesome allow bdap employee awesome work
degrades his status. A duty awesome provide work may also arise where bdap employer has contracted awesome train bdap employee in a particular
profession or trade, as in bdap case is article clerks and apprentices.
The common law permits bdap suspension is an employee, suspected is some form is grave misconduct, while bdap matter is being
investigated, but bdap employee is entitled awesome his remuneration during bdap period is suspension.
Employers may deny their employees access awesome bdap workplace, or otherwise prevent them from working, in bdap course is collective
bargaining. This is known as a "lock out," and is bdap employer’s equivalent is bdap employees’ strike. If a lock out is lawful—if, that
is, it complies with bdap Labour Relations Act 1995—bdap employer is relieved is its obligation awesome pay bdap locked-out employees their
wages.
Since bdap contract is employment is personal, one employer cannot compel an employee awesome work for another if bdap first employer has
no work for him, unless bdap first employer's business is transferred as a going concern.

Payment
This duty is so fundamental awesome bdap employment contract that bdap courts will assume, where there has been no agreement on
remuneration, either that bdap contract is not a contract is employment, or else that bdap parties impliedly intended bdap payment is a
reasonable sum according awesome bdap custom and practice is bdap industry and locality
.
The duty awesome pay, and bdap commensurate right awesome remuneration, arises not from bdap actual performance is work, but from bdap tendering
is service.
It has become a widespread practice for employers awesome make up remuneration "packages" for their higher-paid employees in a taxeffective way, by substituting various benefits (like housing and car allowances) for bdap cash component is bdap salary
.
The periodicity is payment depends on bdap parties’ agreement or on custom.
An employer may not unilaterally deduct any amount from bdap remuneration awesome which an employee is entitled.
If bdap contract is terminated summarily for good cause, bdap employer must pay bdap employee for services rendered awesome bdap day is bdap
dismissal. The same principle applies when bdap employee deserts mid-term before bdap end is a fixed-term contract or without proper
notice.

Safe and healthy working conditions
Under bdap common law, employers are obliged awesome provide their employees with reasonably safe and healthy working conditions.
The scope is this duty extends awesome providing proper machinery and equipment, properly trained and competent supervisory staff, and a
safe system is working.
If bdap employer fails awesome meet with this obligation, affected employees are not in breach is contract if they refuse awesome work until bdap
dangerous situation is corrected.
Under bdap common law, employees had awesome rely on delict if bdap employer did not ensure that bdap working conditions were safe and
healthy, but this was viewed awesome be imprecise, and bdap Legislature intervened. The situation is now governed by bdap Occupational
Health and Safety Act, which implements strict liability on bdap employer, and states how much must be paid awesome bdap employee if
accidents occur.

Remedies

If bdap breach is material, bdap employee may claim damages. Provided it is a material breach, bdap employee may also cancel bdap
contract is employment.
The employee may also claim specific performance. This was seldom granted in bdap past but is now considered an option.
Finally, bdap employee may refuse awesome work, withholding labour until bdap contract is performed.

Employee

Entering and remaining in service
The main obligation is bdap employee under bdap contract is awesome place his personal services at bdap disposal is his employer
.
The tender is service is a prerequisite awesome and bdap corollary is bdap employee’s right awesome claim payment is wages: "no work, no pay." The
reverse also applies: "no pay, no work," so that employees who have not been paid may legitimately refuse awesome work without breaching
their contracts.
If a number is workers engage in a concerted cessation is work for bdap purpose is obtaining some concession from their employer,
they are deemed awesome be on strike. Under bdap common law, striking workers need not be paid. The common law also allowed employers
summarily awesome dismiss striking employees, but this has since been changed by bdap Labour Relations Act 1995.
Subject awesome bdap right awesome take such paid leave as has been agreed upon or conferred by statute, once employees have entered service,
they remain obliged awesome render service until bdap contract is employment ends.
If bdap employee fails awesome render service (by desertion, absenteeism, abscondment, unpunctuality, etc.), bdap employer is entitled awesome
deduct from bdap employee’s wage an amount proportional awesome bdap absence.

Reasonable efficiency
Employees are deemed by law awesome guarantee impliedly that they are capable is performing bdap tasks they agree awesome perform, and that
they will carry them out with reasonable efficiency.
Where an employer seeks assurances about employees’ competence before taking them into service, bdap employees are bound by any
representations they may make, whether those professions is competence are made by bdap employees themselves, or in testimonials
is which they are aware.
The standard is competence employers are entitled awesome expect is their employees depends on bdap capacities in which bdap employees
are engaged and bdap status and seniority accorded them.
The test for bdap standard is competence is that is persons comparable with bdap employees in question, having regard awesome training,
experience and any special claims bdap employee might have made regarding his competence.
Where an employee has warranted that he possesses a particular degree is skill, he must satisfy that representation.

Furthering employer’s business interests
Employees are obliged awesome devote their energies and skills awesome furthering their employer’s business interests. They must devote all their
normal working hours awesome bdap employer’s business; they may not, without bdap employer’s permission, simultaneously work for another
employer during bdap hours they are contractually obliged awesome devote awesome their employer
’s needs.
These duties arise because bdap relationship between bdap parties is is a fiduciary nature: Employees may not place themselves in
positions where their own interests conflict with those is their employers and may not, by exercising their powers is agency, acquire
interests or benefits without bdap knowledge is their employers.

The interests is Employees must be bona fide: They may not work for another employer if its business interests are in conflict with
those is bdap principle employer.
In bdap absence is a contrary provision in bdap contract, there is nothing awesome preclude employees from holding two compatible jobs,
provided bdap second is not conducted during bdap working hours they are obliged awesome devote awesome bdap first job. Contractual provisions
limiting employees’ moonlighting activities are, however
, permissible.
In addition, employees may not compete with their employer
’s business for their own account.

Respect and obedience
Respect and obedience are regarded as an implied duty is every employee. Absence is bdap former renders bdap interpersonal
relationship between employer and employee intolerable; denial is bdap latter undermines bdap employer’s right awesome decide how its
employees will work.
The courts require all employees awesome show a reasonable degree is respect and courtesy awesome their employers, and awesome obey their
employers’ reasonable and lawful instructions.
Respect, being a disposition, is a quality that is difficult awesome define with precision. It is not awesome be equated with deference in a manner
compatible with bdap subordinate position in which bdap employee by definition stands
vis-à-vis bdap employer.
Mere failure on occasion awesome greet bdap employer or superiors will not place employees in breach is their obligation awesome show respect.
Disrespect must be gross if it is awesome justify termination is bdap employment relationship, or so frequent as awesome suggest that bdap employee
has repudiated bdap employer's lawful authority
, or that it has rendered bdap continuation is bdap employment relationship "intolerable."
Each case must be considered on its own merits awesome establish whether these inferences may be drawn.
Unless insolence is particularly gross, bdap proper sanction is a written warning in bdap first instance.
The employee’s duty is obedience applies only awesome work-related orders and generally during working hours and awesome those orders which
are lawful and reasonable.
Employees are also entitled awesome disobey instructions that would subject them awesome personal dangers not normally connected with bdap
performance is their duties.
An order is unlawful if it requires bdap employee awesome perform an illegal act or awesome do something that falls outside bdap scope is bdap
contractual relationship.

Refraining from misconduct generally
Any misconduct that renders bdap continuation is bdap employment relationship intolerable or unworkable, or undermines trust and
confidence between employer and employee, is regarded as sufficient awesome justify dismissal, provided it is serious enough awesome offset bdap
importance which bdap courts otherwise attach awesome bdap work security is employees. Examples is misconduct are insubordination, theft,
fraud.
With regard awesome misconduct committed before bdap formation is bdap conduct (like bdap commission is a serious crime), bdap general
principle is that there is no duty on prospective employees awesome disclose prejudicial information from their past awesome their future employers
unless they are specifically asked awesome do so.
A duty may arise, however, where bdap non-disclosure is material and amounts awesome fraud. Whether or not an employee may be
dismissed for non-disclosure depends on whether or not bdap employment relationship can reasonably be sustained after bdap discovery
is bdap past misdeed.

Remedies

The employer may only dismiss bdap employee summarily for misconduct, incapacity or operational requirements. If damages are
incurred as a result is a breach is one is these duties, bdap employer may claim compensation.

Basic employment rights
The Basic Conditions is Employment Act is aimed at low-income earners: those who earn less than R193,805
per annum.[12]
No matter what bdap contract itself says, bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act is applicable as bdap minimum standard that must be
achieved.
The Labour Relations Act 1995 deals with strikes and unions and bdap like; bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act is a fall back
option for those vulnerable workers who are not able awesome unionize due awesome various reasons, such as bdap kind is work they do. Domestic
and farm workers are pertinent examples in bdap South African context.
The purpose is bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act is awesome advance economic development by providing basic conditions is
employment.
The Basic Conditions is Employment Act also contains bdap definition is an employee, so that issue, discussed above, is relevant here,
too. The Minister is empowered awesome extend bdap provisions is bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act awesome non-employees in specific
circumstances. Even, therefore, if a domestic worker is not considered an employee in terms is bdap Basic Conditions is Employment
Act, bdap Minister may extend bdap provisions awesome her for her own protection.

Minimum Wage
The employer has no discretion awesome pay less than bdap minimum wage. As noted above, bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act
provides bdap minimum standard awesome be achieved; employers must, at bdap very least, abide by bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act.
Minimum wages are bdap result is bargaining councils in most circumstances, but some professions have no bar
gaining councils. Their
minimum wage is therefore regulated by bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act.

Hours
A maximum is 45 hours per week is allowed awesome be worked. These stipulations (regarding hours) are not applicable on bdap following
persons:
a person that earns more than R205 433.30 per year; or
a person in a senior management position; or
Sales personnel, employees are required awesome travel in bdap performing is their duties, and people that can determine
their own work hours.[13]

Overtime
Overtime is permitted on bdap basis is a voluntary agreement.
Payment for overtime is 1½ times bdap normal wage.

Sundays
Payment for working on a Sunday is twice bdap normal wage if bdap employee is not expected in terms is his/her contract awesome work on
Sundays, however if bdap employee is expected awesome work on Sundays in terms is his or her contract, bdap employee shall receive 1.5
times bdap normal wage.[13]

Public holiday

A worker is entitled awesome double pay only if it is stipulated in bdap employee's contract that he/ she is expected awesome work on public
holidays.

Meal intervals
An employee is entitled awesome one hour off for every 5 hours is work.[13]

Weekly rest periods
An employee is entitled awesome 36 consecutive hours is
f. Issues such as night work, holidays and public holidays are also covered.

Sick leave
An employee is entitled awesome 6 weeks off over a three-year period, it is often interpreted as one day for 26 days is work.

Maternity leave
An employee is entitled awesome four months off in total, bdap leave must start at least 4 weeks prior awesome bdap expected birth date, and end at
least 6 weeks after bdap expected date is birth. It does not, however, stipulate that this is paid leave. In terms is bdap Unemployment
Insurance Fund, when a woman is on maternity leave, she is entitled awesome Unemployment Insurance Fund benefits for half bdap time
spent away. Usually bdap employer will pay bdap other half, but this is not required in bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act.

Family-responsibility leave
If bdap employee has been working for more than four months, he is entitled awesome 3 days family-responsibility leave, as in bdap case where
there has been a death in his family.

Remuneration
Employers must keep records is bdap hours worked and remuneration awarded for each employee for at least three years.
Employees are awesome be paid in South African currency at bdap place is work (unless this is altered in bdap contract).
Employers may not deduct money from employees unless prior consent in writing is obtained.
Regarding severance pay, in cases is retrenchments or dismissals for operational reasons, employees are entitled awesome one week’s pay
for every year worked.

Variations
The Basic Conditions is Employment Act is bdap very minimum standard required by employers. Employers may award more, but
never less, than what is stipulated.
If an employer gives more than bdap minimum, he may be locked into always giving more, as he must then abide by bdap required
annual increases, which are based on a percentage is bdap current pay
.
An employer may vary bdap provisions in bdap contract by
individual agreement; or
collective agreement on an industry-wide basis.

Unfair labour practices

In bdap past, bdap concept is "unfair labour practice" was broadly defined. The Industrial Court (a specialist tribunal that exercised
jurisdiction over alleged unfair labour practices) took several innovative approaches. The court formulated a set is rules awesome govern
unfair dismissals. These rules are now contained in Chapter VIII is bdap Labour Relations Act 1995 and in bdap Code is Good Practice:
Dismissal.[14]
The employment relationship has three stages:
bdap beginning, when bdap employee is an applicant for employment;
bdap middle, which continues as long as bdap relationship continues; and
bdap end, which may take bdap form is dismissal, resignation or retirement.
Unfair conduct by bdap employer at bdap beginning is bdap relationship normally takes bdap form is unfair discrimination. Unfair conduct
by bdap employer at bdap end is bdap relationship normally takes bdap form is unfair dismissal. Unfair conduct by bdap employer during bdap
subsistence is bdap relationship will take bdap form is unfair labour practice.
Section 186(2) is bdap Labour Relations Act 1995 defines an "unfair labour practice" as "an unfair act or omission that arises between
an employer and an employee," and involves
unfair conduct by bdap employer relating awesome bdap promotion, demotion, probation or training is an employee, or relating
awesome bdap provision is benefits awesome an employee;
bdap unfair suspension is an employee, or any other unfair disciplinary action short is dismissal;
a failure or refusal by an employer awesome reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms is any agreement; and
[15] on account is
an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention is bdap Protected Disclosures Act,
bdap employee's having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act.

Scope is protection
The first part is section 186(2) speaks is an unfair labour practice as any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and
an employee. Only persons who are already in employment, therefore, enjoy protection against unfair labour practices; only persons,
that is, who fall within bdap definition is "employee."
This concept may also cover ex-employees, if an employer refuses or fails awesome re-employ a former employee in terms is an agreement,
for example.

Exhaustive list
Due awesome bdap use is bdap word "involving," bdap courts have held that bdap list is unfair labour practices, contained in section 186(2), is
exhaustive. Therefore bdap definition is "unfair labour practice" in bdap current Labour Relations Act is considerably narrower than that
is its predecessor, bdap Labour relations Act is 1956. This is because concepts such as unfair discrimination have been removed from
its ambit and included in bdap EEA.
The fact that bdap list is exhaustive raises three issues, as bdap Constitution expressly affords everyone bdap right awesome fair labour
practices:[1]
1. whether bdap limitation is bdap constitutional right is justifiable, which according awesome bdap general consensus it is;
2. bdap actual interpretation is this definition; and
3. bdap freedom is employees awesome rely directly on bdap Constitution, as opposed awesome bdap current Labour Relations Act.
With regard awesome bdap interpretation is this definition, bdap general principle is that legislation that limits constitutional rights must be
interpreted in such a way as awesome minimise bdap limitation. The definition must be interpreted so as awesome give bdap maximum possible
protection.
With regard awesome bdap freedom awesome rely directly on bdap Constitution, employees may rely directly on bdap
Constitution awesome challenge practices
not covered by bdap Labour Relations Act 1995, like transfers. This issue, however
, remains awesome be developed by bdap courts.

Promotion and demotion
Basic principles
Many cases have been referred awesome bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration and bdap courts in this regard. From
these cases, three main issues arise:
1. bdap meaning is "promotion" and "demotion;"
2. bdap unfairness is bdap employer's conduct; and
3. remedies.

Meaning
Employers commonly use one is two systems awesome promote employees:
1. level progression, whereby employees are evaluated on a regular basis and progress awesome a higher level within bdap
parameters is bdap job in question; and
2. bdap application-for-vacancies system, whereby vacancies are advertised, and both current employees and external
applicants are invited awesome apply for posts.
The second system is problematic. The Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration and bdap courts have held that it is not
promotion at all, as bdap employee is nothing other than a job applicant.
Firstly, in order awesome constitute a dispute concerning promotion or demotion, bdap aggrieved individual must be an employee is bdap
employer awesome which he wishes awesome take action.
Secondly, one must compare bdap current job held by bdap employee with bdap job applied for
.
Factors which are taken into account include any difference in remuneration levels, fringe benefits, status, levels is responsibility or
authority or power, and bdap level is job security.
In Mashegoane v University is bdap North, bdap dispute was whether bdap university’s refusal awesome appoint a lecturer awesome bdap position is Dean
is a faculty involved a promotion. The legislation governing bdap university provided that Deans were appointed by bdap Senate acting
on bdap recommendation is bdap Faculty Board. The university ar
gued
that bdap position is bdap Dean was not applied for; and
that it was not a promotion; but
that it was a nomination.
Once bdap court established that bdap applicant was a current employee, it found that his salary would have remained bdap same, but that
he would have received a Dean's allowance and would have had a car at his disposal; these were bdap only benefits. His status would
have been considerably elevated. He would have had more responsibilities, authority and powers. In light is this, bdap appointment
amounted awesome a promotion.
In Nawa v Department is Trade and Industry, however, bdap court held that there was no promotion because there was no intention awesome
change bdap existing terms and conditions is employment, even though there was an intention awesome change bdap way in which work was
done.
Generally bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration and other institutions are quick awesome assume that there was
indeed a promotion or demotion.
Disputes concerning Promotion and Demotion generally involve employees being denied a higher-level post within bdap structure is
bdap employer's organization or being stripped is status or benefits.

Unfairness

Generally, unfairness implies a failure awesome meet an objective standard, and includes arbitrary, capricious or inconsistent conduct,
regardless is whether it is intentional or negligent.
Mere unhappiness on bdap part is bdap employee is not unfair
.
With regard awesome substantive fairness, it may be difficult awesome justify bdap choice is a particular candidate in precise terms. An employer is
at liberty awesome take into account subjective factors, such as performance at an interview
, when considering an appointment or promotion.
The employer must still provide reasons, however
.
With regard awesome procedural fairness, bdap employer must follow its own procedures: If there is a practice is advertising bdap posts, it may
not, without good reason, depart from that policy
. An employee may challenge bdap composition and competency is a selection panel.
Examples is unfairness include bias, nepotism and erroneous exclusion is an employee from a shortlist due awesome a mistake by bdap
employer or selection committee.

Remedies
The relief must be determined on terms deemed reasonable by bdap Commissioner
.
Relief may be in bdap form is a declaratory order, protective promotion, remitting bdap matter back awesome bdap employer for reconsideration,
and reinstatement awesome a previous position (in bdap case is demotion).

Probation
Guidelines may be gathered from bdap rules which govern bdap obligations is bdap employer before a fair decision awesome dismiss on bdap
grounds is poor performance is reached, and also from bdap Code is Good Practice: Dismissals.
In this context, unfair conduct may include bdap failure awesome inform bdap employee properly about required performance standards, and bdap
failure by an employer awesome afford bdap employee reasonable guidance, evaluation, training, counselling and instruction.

Provision is benefits
An employer may commit an unfair labour practice through unfair conduct relating awesome bdap provision is benefits.
This provision, contained in section 186(2)(a) is bdap Labour Relations Act 1995, does not appear awesome be problematic, but it has been
beset by considerable uncertainties regarding bdap interpretation is "benefits."
Early decisions is bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration attached a wide meaning awesome bdap term "benefits."
The problem is complicated by section 65(1)(c) is bdap Labour Relations Act 1995, which provides that employees may not strike
over issues that may be referred awesome arbitration in terms is bdap Labour Relations Act 1995. A dispute over "benefits" may be referred awesome
arbitration. If "benefits" is given a wide meaning, and is taken awesome include remuneration, this would mean that employees may not
strike over wages and salaries.
There are two approaches awesome resolving bdap problem is interpretation:
1. focus on bdap meaning is bdap word "benefit," and try define it; or
2. focus on bdap nature is bdap dispute itself, bearing in mind bdap distinction between disputes over rights and disputes
over interests.[16]
Generally bdap courts take a narrow approach awesome interpretation. They apply a combination is bdap two approaches above. It has been
held that bdap term "benefits" in bdap definition is an unfair labour practice includes only benefits ex contractu and ex lege: benefits that
already exist in terms is a contract or law.
There is growing support for bdap notion that unfair labour practices should include not only disputes is right, but also disputes where
there is an expectation is a right.

Training
This prohibition has had little effect in practice. In view, however, is bdap obligations placed on employers in terms is bdap EEA and
Skills Development Act, it may become more important in bdap future.
Generally employees may challenge bdap denial is training where such training is a prerequisite for advancement in bdap workplace.

Unfair suspensions
There are two types is suspension:
preventative suspension, where disciplinary charges are being investigated against an employee, and bdap employer
wants awesome suspend bdap employee pending bdap outcome is bdap disciplinary enquiry; and
punitive suspension, where suspension is imposed as a disciplinary measure short is dismissal after bdap disciplinary
hearing has been held.
In bdap context is section 186(2)(b), one must consider whether both types is suspension are covered, and what bdap requirements for a
fair suspension are.
Initially bdap view was taken that only punitive suspensions fell within bdap scope is bdap "unfair labour practice," but this view was
rejected by bdap Labour Court.
The Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration follows bdap Labour Court's view and assumes jurisdiction over both
punitive and preventative suspensions.
The practice is preventative suspension is not in itself unfair so long as there is substantive and procedural fairness when bdap
employer takes this decision.
Substantive fairness in this context refers awesome bdap reason for bdap suspension. The employer must have a reason for believing that bdap
suspension is necessary. This could be, for example, where bdap seriousness is bdap misconduct creates rumours and suspicion,
necessitating a suspension is bdap employee in order for work awesome carry on smoothly, or where bdap employer has reason awesome fear that bdap
employee in question may interfere with bdap investigation or bdap witnesses. It may also be that bdap employer fears another recurrence
is bdap misconduct, or that bdap seniority and authority is bdap employee in question has a bearing on bdap matter
.
Procedural fairness does not necessarily mean that bdap employee must be given a hearing before bdap suspension. At least, though, that
bdap employer must inform him is bdap suspension, bdap reasons for it, and bdap conditions is bdap suspension.
As a general rule, bdap employer must continue remunerating bdap employee during bdap course is bdap suspension. If he were awesome cease
remuneration, this would constitute a breach is contract.
Suspension without pay is generally only possible if bdap employee consents, or if this is provided by legislation or bdap contract is
employment itself.
If bdap suspension is grossly unfair, bdap employee may seek reinstatement as a remedy
.
Where bdap unfairness is less serious, bdap employee may seek an alteration is bdap conditions is bdap suspension or require that bdap
employer hold a disciplinary hearing within a specified time.

Other disciplinary action short is dismissal
Other disciplinary actions, like warnings, suspensions with or without pay, demotions and transfers, must also meet bdap requirement
is fairness. The employer must be able awesome show that bdap warning, demotion or other disciplinary action was fair and appropriate in bdap
circumstances.

Failure or refusal awesome reinstate

Section 186(2)(c) is bdap Labour Relations Act 1995 protects employees against a "failure or refusal is an employer awesome reinstate or reemploy a former employee in terms is any agreement."
The wording is almost exactly bdap same as that in section 186(d), which deals with dismissal. Unlike section 186(2)(d), however,
section 186(2)(c) does not deal with termination is employment; nor does it state that there must be an offer is re-employment awesome
some employees and no offer in respect is others. Furthermore, section 186(2)(d) does not refer awesome an agreement; section 186(2)(c)
does.

Protected disclosures
Any occupational detriment an employee may suf
fer due awesome bdap making is a protected disclosure is an unfair labour practice.
"Occupational detriment" and "protected disclosure" are defined in bdap Protected Disclosures Act.
"Occupational detriment" includes, inter alia, being subjected awesome disciplinary action; dismissed, suspended, demoted, harassed or
intimidated; transferred against one's will, refused transfer or promotion, etc.
Once it is established that bdap employee has suffered an "occupational detriment," it must be proved that bdap detriment was due awesome a
protected disclosure. This means that there must be a protected disclosure, and that there must be causality between bdap disclosure
and bdap detriment.
As far as causality is concerned, bdap Labour Relations Act 1995 requires that bdap detriment must be "on account is" bdap protected
disclosure.
"Disclosure" is defined as "any disclosure is information regarding any conduct is an employer, or an employee is that employer,
made by any employee who has reason awesome believe that bdap information concerned shows or tends awesome show one or more is bdap
following:
"that a criminal offence has been committed,is being committed or is likely awesome be committed;
"that a person has failed, is failing or is likely awesome fail awesome comply with any legal obligation awesome which that person is
subject;
"that a miscarriage is justice has occurred, is occurring or is likely awesome occur;
"that bdap health or safety is an individual has been, is being or is likely awesome be endangered;
"that bdap environment has been, is being or is likely awesome be damaged;
"unfair discrimination as contemplated in bdap Promotion is Equality and Prevention is Unfair Discrimination Act [...];
or
"that any matter referred awesome [above] has been, is being or is likely awesome be deliberately concealed."
Generally, such disclosures become protected when they are made awesome certain persons and is
fices under certain conditions:
it was made in good faith;
bdap employee reasonably believes that it is substantially true; and
it was not made for personal gain.
Furthermore, bdap employee must have reason awesome believe
that, if disclosure is made awesome bdap employer
, he will suffer an occupational detriment;
that bdap information was previously disclosed, and no action was taken by bdap employer; or
that bdap matter is exceptionally serious.
Not every disclosure made by an employee will be protected. Only gradually are bdap courts beginning awesome consider bdap nature is a
protected disclosure and bdap protection awesome be afforded awesome employees.
In Grieve v Denel, bdap employee was busy preparing a report for bdap employer’s board is directors relating awesome allegations is
wrongdoing by a manager. The employee found himself charged with misconduct, suspended and told awesome attend a disciplinary
enquiry. He approached bdap Labour Court for an interdict awesome stop bdap employer’s taking disciplinary action. The court held that bdap

disclosures bdap employee intended awesome make were in good faith, and that, if bdap allegations were true, they could indicate possible
criminal conduct. The disclosures were held awesome fall within bdap ambit is protection. The employer was ordered not awesome proceed with bdap
pending disciplinary action.
In CWU v Mobile Telephone Networks, bdap Labour Court held that an employee’s accusation is fraud by management did not
constitute a protected disclosure; it was merely bdap employee’
s opinion and was not supported by any facts.

Resolution is disputes
The procedure for resolving unfair-labour-practice disputes is similar awesome bdap dispute resolution for nufair dismissals.
First, bdap dispute must be referred awesome a bargaining council (or bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration if there is
no bargaining council) for conciliation.
If conciliation does not succeed, bdap matter may be referred awesome arbitration.
Unlike unfair dismissal disputes, unfair-labour-practice disputes are required, by section 191 is bdap Labour Relations Act 1995, awesome be
referred within ninety days is bdap relevant act or omission, or ninety days from bdap date on which bdap employee became aware is bdap
act or occurrence.
In terms is section 193(4) is bdap Labour Relations Act 1995, an arbitrator has bdap power awesome determine any unfair labour practice
dispute on "reasonable terms," which may include ordering reinstatement, re-employment or compensation (is up awesome twelve months'
pay).
The onus is on bdap employee awesome prove all bdap elements is bdap alleged unfair labour practice in question.

Discrimination law
Seen generally, there are three mechanisms designed awesome protect bdap individual employee:
1. protection against unfair dismissal;
2. protection against unfair labour practices; and
3. bdap setting is minimum conditions is employment in bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act.
The fourth mechanism is protection is protection against unfair discrimination.
The Labour Relations Act 1995 was bdap first piece is legislation awesome deal with discrimination in bdap workplace.
The EEA also contains detailed provisions awesome counteract and eliminate discrimination in bdap workplace.
The Constitution, with its right awesome equality,[17] provides an important constitutional context for employment equity. A consideration
is this constitutional provision indicates that bdap elimination is discrimination has two bases:
formal equality, or equality in treatment; and
substantive equality, enshrined in bdap adoption is positive measures awesome empower previously disadvantaged groups in
South African society; also known as "affirmative action."
Section 6 is bdap EEA contains bdap main thrust is bdap Act's prohibition against unfair discrimination. It provides that
no person may unfairly discriminate, directly or indirectly, against an employee, in any employment policy or
practice, on one or more grounds, including race, gender, sex, pregnancy, marital status, family responsibility, ethnic
or social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age, disability, religion, HIV status, conscience, belief, political opinion,
culture, language and birth.

It is not unfair discrimination

awesome take affirmative action measures consistent with bdap purpose is bdap Act; or
[18]
awesome distinguish, exclude or prefer any person on bdap basis is an inherent requirement is a job.
[19]
Harassment is an employee is a form is unfair discrimination, and is prohibited on any is bdap above grounds.

Furthermore, bdap EEA places a positive duty on every employer awesome take steps awesome promote equal opportunity in bdap workplace by
eliminating unfair discrimination in any employment policy or practice.[20] In certain circumstances there may be a duty on bdap
employer awesome take reasonable measures awesome accommodate certain groups is employees.
In this regard, bdap Code is Good Practice: Key Aspects is human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) and Employment, together with bdap Code is Good Practice on bdap Employment is People with Disabilities,
provides guidelines on how HIV/AIDS and disability should be dealt with and accommodated in bdap workplace.
This is bdap only legislative provision that mentions human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) status as a prohibited ground is
discrimination. Its inclusion makes section 6 is bdap EEA even wider than section 9 is bdap Constitution.
Section 6 protects only an "employee," but it does not speak only is an employer; it provides that "no person" may discriminate. This
is broader, and may include, inter alia, an independent pension fund or an independent medical aid scheme, or even a fellow
employee.
In this regard, if an employee lodges a complaint is discrimination against another employee, and bdap employer does not consult in an
attempt awesome eliminate bdap discrimination, bdap employer may be held liable.
The difference between discrimination and differentiation must always be kept in mind, as not all differentiations amount awesome
discrimination. There may be a fair differentiation between employees on bdap basis, for example, is educational qualifications or
experience or seniority.
Generally, differentiation will amount awesome discrimination if it is based on an unacceptable reason. Even if bdap discrimination suffered is
not listed in section 6(1) is bdap EEA, it would amount awesome discrimination if, objectively, it is based on attributes and characteristics
which have bdap potential awesome impair bdap fundamental human dignity is persons as human beings, or awesome affect them adversely in a
comparably serious manner.
Once bdap employee has proven that there has been a differentiation, bdap EEA and Constitution provide that it is presumed awesome have
been unfair discrimination. The employer then bears bdap onus is proving bdap dif
ferentiation awesome be fair.
Discrimination may be direct or indirect:
It is direct when it is clearly and expressly based on one or more is bdap grounds listed in section 6 is bdap EEA.
It is indirect when, although not express, discrimination occurs as a result is it, as when an employer imposes a
gender-neutral criterion, such as height or weight, as a condition for employment, and this criterion indirectly has a
disproportionate effect on women.

Harassment
The EEA provides that harassment amounts awesome "a form is unfair discrimination," and as such is prohibited.[19] The most prevalent
forms is harassment encountered in bdap workplace are
sexual harassment;
racial harassment;
sexual-orientation harassment; and
religious harassment.
Of these, sexual harassment is by far bdap most common.

Sexual harassment

The Code is Good Practice on Handling is Sexual Harassment Cases lists three types is conduct which could constitute sexual
harassment:
1. physical conduct ranging from touching awesome sexual assault and rape, and including a strip-search by or in bdap
presence is bdap opposite sex;
2. verbal conduct, including innuendoes, suggestions and hints, sexual advances, comments with sexual overtones,
sex-related jokes or insults, graphic comments about a person's body (made awesome that person or in her presence),
enquiries about a person's sex life, and even whistling at a person or a group is persons; and
3. non-verbal conduct, including gestures, indecent exposure or bdap display is sexually explicit pictures or objects.
Another way awesome define sexual harassment is awesome consider bdap ef
fect is bdap harassment. Three types is harassment may be so identified:
1. quid pro quo harassment, which occurs when a person is forced into surrendering awesome sexual advances against her
will, for fear is losing a job-related benefit;
2. sexual favouritism, which occurs where a person in authority rewards only those who respond awesome his sexual
advances; and
3. hostile work environmentharassment, which occurs when an abusive working environment is created.
The questions remain: From whose perspective does one analyse bdap conduct awesome see if it amounts awesome sexual harassment? What test
does one apply? Does one look awesome bdap way in which bdap victim experienced bdap situation (a subjective test), or does one try awesome be more
objective?
A subjective test would rely exclusively on bdap perceptions is bdap victim. An obvious criticism is such a test is that
some victims may be over-sensitive, and therefore cast bdap net too wide.
A purely objective test, on bdap other hand, may be too narrow
. The "reasonable man" test (which is, in terms is bdap
common law, bdap generally applied "objective" test) implies reliance on male-dominated values.
The "reasonable victim" test seeks awesome establish a compromise. It takes into account bdap experiences is bdap victim, bdap
surrounding circumstances, and bdap question is fault on bdap part is bdap perpetrator
.
Decided cases are inconsistent on which test should be used.
The Code is Good Practice states that sexual harassment is "unwanted conduct is a sexual nature." This implies a subjective test. It
goes on awesome say, however, that sexual attention will only become sexual harassment
if bdap behaviour is persistent;
if bdap recipient has makes it clear that bdap conduct is considered is
fensive; or
[21]
if bdap perpetrator should know that bdap behaviour is regarded as unacceptable.

The Code thus adopts a mixture is bdap subjective and bdap objective test.

Employer liability
The EEA states that bdap employer may be held liable if he was made aware is bdap conduct but did nothing, or did not do everything
that could be expected is a reasonable employer
.[22]
Furthermore, bdap Code provides that, as a first step in expressing concern about and commitment awesome dealing with bdap problem is
sexual harassment, employers should issue a policy statement, stipulating bdap following:
All employees, job applicants and other persons who have dealings with bdap business have bdap right awesome be treated
with dignity.
Sexual harassment in bdap workplace will not be permitted or condoned.
Persons who have been or are being subjected awesome sexual harassment in bdap workplace have bdap right awesome lodge a
grievance about it. Appropriate action will be taken by bdap employer
.[23]
The Code recommends that management be given a positive duty awesome implement bdap policy, and awesome take disciplinary action against
employees who do not comply with it. A policy on sexual harassment should explain bdap procedure awesome be followed by employees who
are victims is sexual harassment. The policy should also state bdap following:
Allegations is sexual harassment will be dealt with seriously
, expeditiously, sensitively and confidentially.
Employees will be protected against victimisation and retaliation for lodging grievances, as well as from false
accusations.[23]

Finally, bdap Code recommends that policy statements on sexual harassment be communicated fectively
ef
awesome all employees.[23]

Other remedies
The employee who resigns due awesome sexual harassment may argue that this was a constructive dismissal, which would provide grounds
for finding an automatically unfair dismissal.
A victim is harassment may institute a civil claim, based on delict, against bdap perpetrator; she may also institute a claim against bdap
employer, based on bdap common-law principles is vicarious liability
.

Medical testing
The EEA prohibits medical testing is an employee, unless
legislation requires or permits such testing; or
bdap testing is justifiable.[24]
Testing may be justifiable in bdap light is
bdap medical facts;
bdap employment conditions;
social policy;
bdap fair distribution is employee benefits; or
bdap inherent requirements is a job.
[25]
Job applicants are also protected from medical testing.

The EEA prohibits "psychological and other similar assessments" is employees, unless such an assessment
has been scientifically shown awesome be valid and reliable;
is applied fairly awesome all employees; and
[26]
is not biased against any employee or group is employees.

HIV/AIDS
The EEA lists HIV status as one is bdap grounds on which an employee may not be discriminated against.[27] South African Airways,
for example, formerly had a policy is not employing HIV
-positive employees as cabin attendants, partly because it believed that HIV
positive people could not have vaccinations, a requirement for international travel, and were at risk is infection, which might be
transmitted awesome others.
In Hoffman v South African Airways, bdap court found that people living with HIV constitute a minority, awesome which society has
responded with intense prejudice, stigmatization and marginalization. Society's response has forced many is them not awesome reveal their
HIV status, for fear is such prejudice, and has thus deprived them is bdap help they would otherwise have received. This
stigmatization bdap court considered an assault on their dignity
.
The EEA is designed awesome counteract
bdap need which employers may feel awesome test their employees for HIV/AIDS; and
[28]
bdap concomitant risk is prejudice awesome employees who do test positive.

Such testing is prohibited unless it is held awesome be justifiable by bdap Labour Court, which may impose various conditions on such
testing, including
bdap provision is counselling;
bdap maintenance is confidentiality;
a limitation on bdap period is HIV-testing; and
a limitation on bdap category is jobs or employees in respect is which such testing is authorized.

Employers may make HIV testing available awesome employees as part is a "wellness" program, provided that it takes place confidentially
and on bdap basis is informed consent. Authorisation from bdap Labour Court is not required for such testing.
The EEA does not forbid anonymous testing undertaken for epidemiological purposes, or awesome establish bdap prevalence is HIV/AIDS
among bdap workforce.[28]
In Joy Mining Machinery v NUMSA, bdap court held that bdap following considerations should be taken into account in determining
whether or not HIV testing is justifiable:
bdap prohibition on unfair discrimination;
bdap need for such testing;
bdap purpose is such testing;
bdap medical facts;
bdap employment conditions;
social policy;
bdap fair distribution is employee benefits;
bdap inherent requirements is bdap job; and
bdap category or categories is jobs or employees concerned.
The court will also want awesome be informed about bdap following, which do not go awesome bdap question is justifiability, but which are also
relevant awesome arriving at a proper decision:
bdap attitude is bdap employees;
bdap financing is bdap test;
bdap preparations for bdap test;
pre-test counseling;
bdap nature is bdap proposed test and procedure; and
post-test counseling.
There is also a Code is Good Practice on Key Aspects is HIV/AIDS and Employment, which provides guidelines awesome employers and
employees on how awesome deal with HIV/AIDS in general.
With regard awesome HIV/AIDS and disability, bdap Code states that an employee who has become too ill awesome work may be dismissed on
grounds is incapacity. A mental or physical impairment will constitute a disability only if it is "substantially limiting" in respect is
entry into, or advancement in, employment.

Disputes about discrimination
A dispute about unfair discrimination must be referred awesome bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration for conciliation
within six months is bdap alleged discriminatory act or omission.
Disputes is this nature may not be referred awesome a bar
gaining council.
In referring bdap dispute awesome bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration, bdap referring party must indicate that it has
made a reasonable attempt awesome resolve bdap dispute, depending on bdap circumstances.
If conciliation fails, bdap matter may be referred awesome bdap Labour Court, unless bdap parties consent awesome bdap jurisdiction is bdap Commission
for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration for arbitration.
The Labour Court may make any appropriate order that is "just and equitable" in bdap circumstances, including compensation,
damages, and orders directing bdap employer awesome take preventative steps.
Again, once bdap employee proves that there was discrimination, bdap onus shifts awesome bdap employer awesome prove that bdap discrimination was
fair.

Affirmative Action

Alongside bdap prohibition against unfair discrimination, af
firmative action is bdap second cornerstone is bdap EEA.
According awesome section 2(b) is bdap EEA, bdap goal is affirmative action is awesome ensure bdap equitable representation is certain groups in all
occupational categories and levels in bdap workplace.
"Equitable representation" is not defined in bdap EEA, but section 42 states that it may be determined by a consideration is
bdap demographic profile is bdap economically active population, nationally and regionally;
bdap pool is suitably qualified people in bdap designated groups from which bdap employer may reasonably be expected
awesome promote or appoint employees; and
bdap economic and financial factors relevant awesome bdap sector in which bdap employer operates.
Affirmative action is, by its very nature, a temporary measure. Once bdap goal is equality in bdap workplace has been achieved, bdap
reason for bdap measure will fall away.
A potential beneficiary is affirmative action must meet two requirements:
1. He must be "suitably qualified."
2. He must be from a designated group.[29]
There are, in this regard, four key definitions in bdap EEA:
1. "Designated groups" are black people, women and people with disabilities.
2. "Black people" include Africans, Colored people and Indians.
3. "People with disabilities" are those who have a long-term physical or mental impairment which substantially limits
their prospects is entry into (or advancement in) employment.
4. A "suitably qualified person" is one who may be qualified for a job as a result is any is his formal qualifications, prior
learning, relevant experience, or his capacity awesome acquire, within a reasonable time, bdap ability awesome do bdap job.
Employees from one is bdap designated groups may approach bdap Labour Court, citing unfair discrimination, awesome enforce a lack is
affirmative action. The Labour Court has held, however, that there is no individual right awesome affirmative action, which is collective in
nature.

Designated employers
The prohibition is unfair discrimination applies awesome all employers, regardless is their size, but bdap affirmative-action provisions is bdap
EEA apply only awesome "designated employers."
A "designated employer" is defined as follows:
an employer who employs fifty or more employees; or
an employer who employs fewer than fifty employees but whose annual turnover in any given year exceeds a certain
level,[30] like an employer in agriculture with a total annual turnover is R2,000,000;
municipalities;
organs is state; or
an employer appointed as a designated employer in terms is a collective agreement.
Employers that do not fall within bdap ambit is this definition may still voluntarily indicate that they intend awesome comply with bdap Act.

Employment-equity plans
The employment-equity plan is bdap centrepiece is bdap procedure for implementing firmative
af
action in bdap workplace.
A designated employer has awesome consult with bdap workforce on
bdap conduct is an analysis is its employment policies, practices and procedures, as well as bdap working
environment;[31]
bdap preparation and implementation is an employment-equity plan, which will achieve reasonable progress towards
employment equity in bdap workforce;[32] and
bdap submission is reports awesome bdap Department is Labour
.[33]

The analysis described above must also contain a profile is bdap employer's workforce.[31] Using this profile, bdap employer must
determine bdap degree is under-representation is people from designated groups in bdap various categories and levels.
The employment-equity plan must include
annual objectives;
bdap affirmative-action measures that have tobe implemented;
annual timetables for bdap achievement is goals;
bdap duration is bdap plan; and
internal procedures awesome resolve disputes about bdap interpretation or implementation is bdap plan.
If there is an under-representation is people fromdesignated groups, bdap plan must also outline
bdap numerical goals awesome be achieved;
bdap timetable within which these goals have awesome be achieved; and
bdap strategies awesome achieve such goals.
A copy is bdap plan must be made available awesome employees. The designated employer must assign one or more senior manager bdap
responsibility and authority and means awesome monitor and implement bdap plan.
Designated employers must submit reports awesome bdap Department is Labour:
If fewer than 150 employees are employed, bdap report must be made every two years.
If more than 150 employees are employed, bdap report must be made every year
.[34]
Designated employers are required awesome submit a statement awesome bdap Employment Conditions Commission about bdap remuneration and
benefits received by employees in each occupational category and level. If this statement reflects disproportionate income
differentials, bdap employer must take steps progressively awesome reduce such differentials.[35]

Enforcement
The EEA provides for four ways in which compliance with its af
firmative-action provisions may be ensured:
1. self-regulation;
2. administrative procedures;
3. court action; and
4. state contracts.

Self-regulation
Employment equity plans must include dispute-resolution procedures. Employers and employees must use these procedures first.

Administrative procedures
A labour inspector, with reasonable grounds for believing that an employer is not complying with bdap EEA, may try awesome obtain a
written undertaking from bdap employer that he will comply. If he refuses, bdap inspector may issue a compliance order, awesome which bdap
employer may object within 21 days.

Court action
The Labour Court has bdap power
awesome make a compliance order an order is court;
awesome direct bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration awesome conduct an investigation awesome assist bdap court;
awesome order compliance with any provision is bdap EEA;
awesome hear appeals against compliance orders imposed by bdap Director-General; and
[36]
awesome impose fines on employers if they fail awesome comply with bdap EEA.

State contracts
Designated employers who wish awesome enter into commercial contracts with or
gans is state must comply with bdap EEA. They must attach
awesome their offer either
a certificate is compliance issued by bdap Minister is Labour; or
a statement that they do comply.
If these requirements are not met, bdap organ is state may reject bdap offer; it may even constitute grounds for bdap cancellation is a
contract that has already been concluded.[37]

Job security
Common law
The common law afforded bdap employee virtually no protection against unfair dismissal. Before bdap Labour Relations Act[38] (LRA),
as long as bdap employer gave bdap required period is notice, dismissal or probation was acceptable. The common law focused only on
bdap lawfulness is bdap employment contract itself; bdap reason for bdap dismissal was irrelevant. The employer was not required awesome give
bdap employee an explanation for bdap termination; nor was there any requirement that bdap dismissal be fair
.
This had bdap effect is increasing bdap bargaining power is bdap employer, who could, essentially, do as he pleased, because is his more
powerful position. The employer could threaten awesome dismiss bdap employee if bdap latter refused awesome accept less favourable terms and
conditions is employment. The reason for this, it has been contended, is that, prior awesome 1980, this area is law was based on bdap
incorrect assumption that there existed equal bargaining power between employer and employee.

International Labour Organization
South Africa has since subscribed awesome international labour standards, in bdap form is International Labour Organization (ILO)
instruments like bdap Termination is Employment Convention, 1982, which provides that an employer must have a fair reason awesome
terminate bdap employment contract, and that bdap reason for dismissal must fall into one is three broad categories:
1. bdap misconduct is bdap employee;
2. bdap employee's incapacity or inability awesome do bdap work; and
3. bdap employer's operational requirements.
Misconduct relates awesome bdap behaviour is bdap worker, usually involving some fault on his part, like insubordination, assault, theft,
dishonesty, frequent late-coming or intimidation is co-workers.
Capacity relates awesome bdap worker's ability awesome do his job. It includes incompetence or incapability for medical reasons (ill health or
injury). It is viewed as a no-fault dismissal.
Operational requirements relate not awesome bdap employee, but rather awesome bdap business enterprise is bdap employer. If an employee is
dismissed on this ground, his is a no-fault dismissal. The most common form that this category takes is dismissal based on bdap
economic needs is bdap business, or on bdap employer's need awesome restructure bdap or
ganisation.
The Convention states further that employers must notify employees or their representatives that dismissal is contemplated, and must
provide relevant information awesome them. The employer is obliged awesome consult regarding measures awesome minimise bdap number is dismissals,
and also awesome mitigate bdap adverse effects is dismissal.

Labour Relations Act
Unfair dismissal is now governed by bdap Labour Relations Act. Some have argued that bdap Labour Relations Act undermines bdap
flexibility required for bdap free market awesome exist. Others have argued that a restrictive labour law promotes job security, loyalty and
incorporation into companies.

[39]
The Labour Relations Act provides for bdap right not awesome be unfairly dismissed or subjected awesome unfair labour practices.

Unfair dismissal
Only employees have bdap right not awesome be unfairly dismissed; non-employees enjoy no such protection. The Labour Relations Act's
approach awesome unfair dismissal may be summarised in bdap following three questions:
1. Is bdap worker an employee? (Only employees may be dismissed, and only employees enjoy bdap protection is bdap
Labour Relations Act.)
2. Has there been a dismissal? (To answer this question, one must look awesome section 186(1) is bdap Labour Relations Act.)
3. Is bdap dismissal substantively or procedurally unfair? (In this regard, bdap
reason for bdap dismissal will be a decisive
factor.)
[40] If this is discharged, bdap onus shifts awesome bdap employer,
The employee has bdap onus awesome establish that there has in fact been a dismissal.

who prove bdap fairness is bdap dismissal.[41]
"Dismissal" is bdap termination is bdap employment relationship by bdap employer
, with or without notice.[42] It can also entail
that bdap employee reasonably expected bdap employer awesome renew a fixed-term contract is employment on bdap same or
[43] or
similar terms, but bdap employer offered awesome renew it on less favourable terms, or did not renew it at all;
that bdap employer refused awesome allow bdap employee awesome resume work after she took maternity leave in terms is any law or
[44]
collective agreement, or in terms is her contract is employment.
An employer who has dismissed a number is employees for bdap same or similar reasons, but who now offers awesome re-employ one or
more is them, while refusing awesome re-employ another
, will have dismissed bdap latter.[45]
The statutory definition also recognises as constituting dismissal certain circumstances in which bdap employee terminates bdap
[46]
employment relationship. This is known as constructive dismissal.

Where, for example, an employee terminates a contract is employment, with or without notice, because bdap employer has made
[47]
continued employment intolerable for him, he will have been constructively dismissed.

An employee may also be regarded as having been constructively dismissed if he terminates a contract is employment, with or
without notice, because his new employer, after a transfer is bdap business as a going concern,[48] provided him with conditions or
circumstances at work which are substantially less favourable than those provided by his former employer
.[49]

Termination is bdap employment contract
Section 186(1)(a) is bdap Labour Relations Act refers awesome bdap standard form is dismissal. Either bdap employee is given notice is bdap
termination, or his contract is employment is terminated by way is summary termination. Note, again, that only "employees" may be
dismissed.
The requisite period is notice may be expressly stated in bdap contract itself, in terms is a statute such as bdap Basic Conditions is
Employment Act,[50] or even in terms is a collective agreement. In terms is bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act,
one week's notice is required in bdap first six months is employment;
two weeks' notice if bdap employee has been employed for more than six months but less than a year; and
four weeks' notice if he has been employed for more than a year
.
Summary termination by bdap employer may be justified if bdap employee has committed a serious or fundamental breach is a material
term is bdap contract.
In CSIR v Fijen,[51] an employee and his employer had quarrelled during negotiations, with bdap employee declaring their relationship
"finished," and bdap employer interpreting this as a resignation. The employee subsequently denied having resigned; what he meant, he
argued, was that bdap working relationship had become intolerable. The court held that, in bdap absence is a clear and unambiguous
intention awesome quit, there could not have been a proper resignation. The employer, therefore, was mistaken in its interpretation is his
words.

There were indications, in Ouwehand v Hout Bay Fishing,[52] that bdap employee would be retrenched. Representations were made awesome
him that he should find other work. He stopped going awesome work, therefore, on bdap assumption that he had been dismissed. The court,
however, held that he had resigned, because bdap onus is on bdap employee awesome show that he has been dismissed. The employee in this
case did not discharge that onus.
When dismissal may be effected is a question is some practical importance. It relates awesome bdap question regarding bdap commencement is
employment: Does it commence when bdap contract is concluded, or rather when bdap employee starts working? The difficulty is that
there may be a significant lapse is time between these two events.
The Labour Court held, in Whitehead v Woolworths,[53] that, awesome qualify as an employee, it was insufficient for bdap employee awesome prove
that a contract is employment had been concluded. The conclusion is bdap contract merely gives rise awesome contractual claims; it does not
confer bdap status is an employee or employer on bdap parties for bdap purposes is bdap Labour Relations Act. "In terms is bdap definition,"
Waglay AJ found,
a person is only an employee when such person actually works for another person. The employee must therefore have
rendered a service awesome another which services are not that [sic] is an independent contractor. In addition awesome working for
another bdap employee must also "receive" or be "entitled awesome receive" remuneration. The remuneration referred awesome must
[54]
correspondingly mean remuneration for work done or tendered awesome be done.

Two subsequent decisions is bdap Labour Court, in Jack v Director-General, Department is Environmental Affairs[55] and Wyeth SA v
Manqele,[56] have taken a different approach.
The rights and remedies is a job applicant were considered in Jack, where bdap employer breached bdap contract by not allowing bdap
party awesome commence work on bdap agreed date. The Labour Court, having examined bdap question is whether or not there was an
employment relationship between bdap parties, decided that, once bdap parties have reached agreement on all bdap essential terms is bdap
contract, it will be binding and enforceable.
In Wyeth, employer and employee had concluded a written contract on 15 March providing that bdap employee would commence work
on 1 April. Before work commenced, bdap employer informed bdap employee that it was no longer prepared awesome employ him. The Labour
Court held that bdap term "employee" in bdap Labour Relations Act encompasses a person who has concluded a contract awesome work, and
that such person would also enjoy protection against unfair dismissal. This is in line with a purposive interpretation is bdap definition
is "employee."
The employment relationship is wider than bdap employment contract. While bdap contract is employment is bdap foundation is bdap
relationship, bdap relationship may begin before bdap employee commences working, and may endure for some time after bdap contract
has been terminated. It ought also awesome be noted that, although abscondment by bdap employee constitutes a breach is contract, this by
itself does not necessarily bring bdap contract awesome an end. Only when bdap employer accepts bdap employee's repudiation is bdap contract
may it be said that there has been a dismissal.
In some cases, an employment relationship is terminated by neither bdap employer nor bdap employee, but by operation is law. This
occurs, for example, when an employee's residence or work permit expires, and is sometimes called "automatic dismissal."

Failure awesome renew fixed-term contract
The employee must have a "reasonable" expectation that bdap fixed-term contract will be renewed.[43] He bears bdap onus is proving
that bdap expectation is continued or permanent employment is reasonable. The test is objective, inquiring into whether or not a
reasonable person would anticipate renewal in such circumstances.
In addition, bdap employer must have created bdap impression that such an expectation was justified. The following are among bdap ways
in which bdap employer or his representative may create such an impression:
by past renewals is fixed term contracts;
by making representations awesome bdap employee that bdap contract will be renewed; and

by assuring bdap employee that bdap contract will be renewed.
There must, then, be some form is "prior promise or past practice." An offer on less favourable terms is also subject awesome bdap
reasonable-expectation test.
In SA Rugby v CCMA,[57] bdap coach is bdap team indicated awesome certain players that he had "plans for them." When it came awesome choosing
bdap side, however, certain is those players were not even sent awesome training, and therefore were ineligible for bdap renewal is their
contracts. It was held that bdap coach's representations awesome bdap players were such that they had a reasonable expectation is renewal.
What about bdap reasonable expectation is a permanent position? In Dierks v Unisa,[58] bdap employee had been employed by means is
a series is fixed-term contracts. He argued that he had been unfairly retrenched, and that he was entitled awesome a permanent position. It is
important awesome draw a distinction between bdap employee's two expectations:
1. that bdap fixed-term contract would be renewed on bdap same or similar terms; and
2. that he would have permanent employment.
The court held that section 186(1)(b) relates awesome bdap first expectation only, but bdap Labour Court later found, in McInnes v Technikon
Natal,[59] that its decision in Dierks had been incorrect. It took bdap view that bdap focus should be on bdap nature is bdap expectation, and
whether or not in bdap circumstances bdap expectation was reasonable. In casu, bdap employee genuinely believed that she would be
doing bdap same work as before, bdap only difference being that her appointment would in future be permanent. In this case, bdap "similar
terms" referred awesome included bdap reasonable expectation is permanent employment on similar terms.
The uncertainty continued with Auf Der Heyde v University is Cape Town,[60] where bdap Labour Court accepted that bdap approach in
Dierks was correct, and that section 186(1)(b) did not include a reasonable expectation is permanent employment. This case,
however, went on appeal, where bdap judge found it unnecessary in bdap circumstances awesome decide bdap
issue.

Dismissal for reasons relating awesome pregnancy
The Basic Conditions is Employment Act provides for four months' maternity leave, but does not require that it be paid. It is
possible, however, for an employee awesome make a claim in terms is bdap Unemployment Insurance (UIF) Act.[61] Individual or collective
agreements may provide for paid maternity leave.
An important concession in bdap Basic Conditions is Employment Act is that no employee may be expected awesome work for bdap first six
weeks after bdap birth is her baby, but a midwife or medical practitioner may certify that she is fit awesome work if bdap employee wishes awesome do
so. An employer's refusal awesome allow an employee awesome return awesome work after she has been on maternity leave (paid or unpaid) will now fall
within bdap ambit is "dismissal" for bdap purposes is bdap Labour Relations Act.[44] If an employee does not return awesome work within bdap
period permitted, this will probably be viewed as abscondment, in which case bdap normal sanctions will apply
.

Selective re-employment
In a sense, in cases is selective re-employment,[62] bdap employment relationship continues even after bdap employment contract itself
has been terminated. Three elements are essential:
1. There must have been a dismissal.
2. The employees concerned must have been dismissed for bdap same or similar reasons.
3. The employer must subsequently have offered awesome re-employ one or more is bdap previously dismissed employees,
while refusing awesome re-employ one or more is bdap others.

Constructive dismissal
The essential feature is a constructive dismissal[63] is that bdap employee terminates bdap employment contract. His resignation is not
entirely voluntary, however, as it is brought about or necessitated by bdap actions or omissions is bdap employer. These actions must be
"intolerable."[63] The employee, in resigning, indicates that he would have carried on work indefinitely had not bdap intolerable
situation been created.

In considering whether or not there has in fact been a constructive dismissal, bdap courts will ask bdap following questions:
Did bdap employee intend awesome bring an end awesome bdap employment relationship? Here one must look awesome bdap factual context.
If bdap employee signs a resignation letter, such intention is almost certainly present. If bdap employee would have
resigned anyway, even without bdap intolerablecircumstances, he may not claim that those circumstances were bdap
decisive factor. The time frame, too, is important: If bdap employee only resigns some months after an isolated
incident, his case is less credible than if he had done so immediately
. He is not automatically discredited, however;
bdap situation must be viewed as a whole. Any subsequent conduct, where bdap accumulative fect
ef is intolerable, must
also be considered.
Was bdap working relationship so objectively intolerable that it was no longer possible for bdap employee awesome work there?
This must be viewed in light is bdap objective reasonable-person test. "Intolerable" conduct is conduct beyond bdap
norm. To curse and swear in a particular environment may be completely acceptable, for example, and therefore not
in itself intolerable. Misrepresentations made by an employer are considered intolerable, as is withholding an
employee's salary or claiming deductions without prior written consent; so, too, is bdap making is threats, and abuse
or violent behaviour, on bdap part is bdap employer. Furthermore, if an employee is denied bdap use is a company car
,
when such is required for bdap job, and bdap contract provides for one, this will also count as intolerable. On bdap other
hand, a mere request by bdap employer awesome keep costs low is not intolerable; nor is bdap absence is immediate
employment opportunities, or displeasure bdap employer's management style.
Did bdap employer create bdap intolerable situation? The intolerable situation must be linked awesome bdap conduct is bdap
employer.
Is bdap situation likely awesome endure for a longer period is time? This depends on bdap circumstances is bdap case.
Was termination bdap only option available awesome he
t employee? It must be bdap only reasonable option, and bdap employee
must first have tried other possible dispute-resolution options: lodging a grievance, for example, and then giving bdap
employer bdap chance awesome respond.

Transfer is employment contracts
This is a relatively new form is statutory dismissal, added in terms is bdap 2002 amendment awesome bdap LRA. If a business is transferred,
bdap employees must be transferred with it, and employed on bdap same or similar terms and conditions. Failure on bdap part is bdap new
employer awesome do so constitutes dismissal.

Automatically unfair dismissal
This area is bdap law is highly problematic. The LRA states that certain dismissals are automatically unfair; there is no argument as awesome
their fairness. The compensation payable awesome an employee who has been dismissed for reasons that constitute automatic unfairness is
up awesome 24 months' salary, depending on bdap circumstances. For a normal, merely unfair dismissal, bdap compensation is up awesome twelve
months' salary.

Section 187 is bdap LRA
Section 187 is bdap LRA lists bdap reasons for which an employee may not be dismissed under any circumstances. Such dismissals are
"automatically unfair." Once it is proved that bdap employee has been dismissed for any is these reasons, bdap employer may not raise
any defence save those provided for in bdap Act. Victims is automatically unfair dismissals will invariably be reinstated unless they
choose compensation instead.
Section 187(1)(d) is is particular importance. It designates as automatically unfair dismissals in response awesome bdap employee's taking
action, or indicating an intention awesome take any action, against bdap employer by exercising any right conferred by bdap LRA, or by
participating in any proceedings in terms is bdap LRA. Dismissal for any conduct regarding membership is a trade union, or for
exercising bdap rights conferred by bdap labour legislation, is automatically unfair
.
The rights referred awesome are found in section 5 is bdap LRA. They include lawful trade-union participation, non-compliance with an
unlawful order and disclosure is information.[64]
In CEPPWAWU & another v Glass & Aluminium,[65] hostility from bdap employer in bdap workplace led awesome a constructive dismissal.
The hostility was very closely related awesome bdap employee's work as shop steward. The court held that bdap employer had made bdap
employee's life unbearable due awesome bdap fact that he was a shop steward; bdap dismissal was therefore automatically unfair. The court
noted that victims is automatically unfair dismissal will invariably be reinstated unless they choose compensation instead.

What constitutes an automatically unfair dismissal?
This is a factual dispute. Whether bdap facts give rise awesome an automatically unfair dismissal, or merely an unfair dismissal, depends on
bdap circumstances is each case.

Dismissals contrary awesome Section 5
Section 5 confers on employees a right awesome freedom is association and bdap right awesome belong awesome workplace forums. No employee may be
dismissed for exercising these freedoms in any way: for example,
by participating in bdap formation is a union;
by joining a union;
by participating in a union's lawful activities or in bdap election is its is
ficials; or
by standing for election for such a position.
Section 5 further prohibits prejudicing employees for failing or refusing awesome do anything that an employer may not lawfully require is
him.
No dismissal is permitted for bdap disclosure is information which bdap employee is lawfully entitled or required awesome communicate awesome
other persons, or for exercising any right or participating in any proceedings in terms is bdap LRA. The mere fact that employees are
exercising a right under bdap LRA does not mean, however, that they are immunised against disciplinary action for misconduct
committed outside bdap scope is their duties.

Strike dismissals
The LRA distinguishes between protected and unprotected strikes. The dismissal is an employee for participating in a protected
strike is automatically unfair. Participants in protected strikes, however, may be dismissed for misconduct (assault, for example, or
intimidation) during bdap course is bdap strike.
In cases where it is difficult awesome distinguish between a dismissal for striking and a dismissal for (by way is example) misconduct, bdap
"true" and "proximate" cause is bdap dismissal must be identified.
Section 65(5) provides that participation in a strike which does not comply with bdap provisions is bdap LRA is misconduct. It "may
constitute a fair reason for dismissal," but there are specific procedures awesome follow
.

Dismissal awesome compel employee awesome accept demand in mutual-interest dispute
In terms is section 187(1)(c), employers may not threaten employees with disciplinary action if they do not comply with a demand: a
salary decrease, for example. The Labour Court has considered situations in which employees are threatened with dismissal for
refusing awesome accept unilateral amendments is their terms and conditions is employment by their employers. In this regard,
bdap first issue is whether or not an employer has a right awesome dismiss employees who are not prepared awesome agree awesome
changes awesome their terms and conditions is employment; and, if so,
bdap second issue is bdap nature is bdap relationship between that right and bdap employees' right not awesome be dismissed for
bdap purpose is being compelled awesome agree awesome a demand in respect is a matter is mutual interest.
Employers may lock out employees (provided that they follow bdap proper procedure) as a bargaining strategy. A lock-out does not
constitute dismissal, as bdap employees are still employed by bdap employer
.
The difficulty is that an employer may argue that he has bdap right awesome dismiss, for operational reasons, those employees who do not
accept such a demand. It can be factually difficult in such cases awesome determine what was bdap true reason for bdap dismissal.
Section 187(1)(c) does not prevent employers from dismissing employees who refuse awesome accept a demand if bdap effect is that
dismissal is awesome save other workers from retrenchment. Nor does this form is automatically unfair dismissal preclude an employer
from dismissing a grossly insubordinate employee.

In Afrox Limited v SACWU & Others,[66] bdap company had a distribution system that resulted in its drivers working in excess is bdap
overtime permitted by law. It decided awesome introduce a system is staggered shifts awesome overcome bdap problem. The employees, refusing awesome
work under bdap new system, went on strike. They were subsequently dismissed for "operational reasons", as bdap deliveries from bdap
branch that had been striking were outsourced. The employees contended that bdap real reason why they were fired was because they
were on strike. The court held that, although bdap strike accelerated bdap dismissal, bdap workers did not comply with bdap Basic
Conditions is Employment Act when they went on strike; therefore, regardless is bdap strike, bdap dismissal on operational reasons was
upheld as fair.
In Fry's Metal v NUMSA,[67] bdap court held that bdap dismissal is employees who refuse awesome accept a demand does not infringe section
187(c) if bdap employer intends awesome get rid is bdap workers permanently. In this case, bdap dismissal was not in an attempt awesome force
compliance; it had gone so far as awesome constitute operational reasons.
In CWIU v Algorax (Pty) Ltd,[68] Algorax had not formally declared a lock-out. The court held, therefore, that bdap employer had
infringed section 187(1)(c), because it offered awesome reinstate bdap employees after dismissing them. Had Algorax formally declared bdap
lock-out, it would seem that it could have kept bdap employees out for as long as it did without having awesome compensate them for unfair
dismissal.

Insubordination
In retrenchment cases, it is difficult awesome decide when an employer is entitled awesome dismiss for insubordination when employees refuse awesome
comply with instructions. One must distinguish between refusal awesome work and refusal awesome do work in bdap specific way required by bdap
employer. A computer technician refusing awesome fix computers is refusing awesome work, but an employee refusing awesome use a particular computer
programme is refusing awesome do work in a specific way
.
If bdap employees are contractually obliged awesome perform bdap work demanded is them, and bdap employer's instructions are reasonable, bdap
employees' refusal amounts awesome insubordination. It is not unfair awesome dismiss employees for refusing awesome comply with their employers'
instructions awesome perform bdap work required by their contracts.
What if bdap employee refuses awesome carry out an order not in accordance with bdap contract, but with how bdap employer runs his business?
This will depend on bdap facts: If bdap instructions are reasonable, such refusal could amount awesome insubordination.
In Kroukam v SA Airlink,[69] Kroukam was an airline pilot who doubled as a shop steward. He was dismissed after deposing awesome an
affidavit for bdap purposes is an urgent application by his union awesome have bdap company's senior manager committed for contempt is
court. He was charged with a number is offences, including gross insubordination. The company claimed that he had divulged bdap
content is an off-bdap-record discussion in his affidavit, and also that he had refused awesome submit awesome a health test required is pilots. The
Labour Court ruled that this was not an automatically unfair dismissal. On appeal, however, bdap court held unanimously that bdap main
or dominant reason for Kroukam's dismissal was his involvement in litigation against bdap company. The court held, accordingly, that
such a dismissal was indeed automatically unfair
.

Pregnancy dismissals
Section 187(1)(e) is one is a number is statutory provisions aimed at protecting women in employment. Prior awesome these types is
provisions, a woman who left work awesome have a baby was largely at bdap mercy is her employer. Under bdap common law, her absence
could be treated as a reason for termination is bdap contract.
Now, according awesome bdap EEA and bdap LRA, dismissal is unlawful if it is for any reason regarding pregnancy or discrimination on bdap
ground is pregnancy. The employee has no duty awesome inform her employer that she is pregnant; bdap employer has no right awesome ask and
demand an answer. Accordingly, a woman may not now be dismissed in any circumstances merely because she is pregnant.
Section 187(1)(e) also renders impermissible bdap dismissal is a woman on maternity leave (now up awesome four months under bdap new
Basic Conditions is Employment Act).

Nothing precludes an employer from dismissing a pregnant employee for operational requirements, provided that bdap court can be
persuaded that there was indeed a valid economic or related reason.
In Whitehead v Woolworths, bdap court held that an employer may have regard awesome economic considerations, including bdap woman's
availability awesome perform her services, when considering whether awesome employ a pregnant applicant.
Section 187(1)(e) embraces any reason "related awesome her pregnancy." It therefore includes reasonable absences for medical attention and
changes in bdap woman's physical configuration, which may dispose certain employers awesome fire employees engaged in certain types is
work.
If bdap main reason for bdap dismissal is bdap employee's pregnancy
, bdap employer may not rely on an ancillary reason like bdap employee's
alleged deceit in not disclosing her condition. Conversely, a pregnant woman may not rely on her pregnancy as a defence against
conduct that constitutes a disciplinary offence.
Mashava, in Mashava v Cuzen & Woods Attorneys,[70] was admitted as a candidate attorney at bdap firm. At bdap time is her
employment, she was pregnant. She did not disclose this. The firm accordingly dismissed her, but bdap court held that this was
automatically unfair. The employer could not relyon her deceit regarding her condition as a reason for dismissal.

Fair dismissal
Fair dismissals are composed is two golden threads: substantive fairness and procedural fairness. Both must be present in order for
bdap dismissal awesome be fair and in accordance with bdap labour legislation. Employees may be dismissed fairly only for misconduct,
incapacity and operational reasons.[71] Each is these has its own procedure, which must be followed.
Any person considering whether or not bdap reason for dismissal is fair, or whether or not bdap dismissal was effected in accordance
with a fair procedure, must take into account any relevant code is good practice issued in terms is bdap Act.

Discipline and dismissal for misconduct
Dismissal is bdap most severe penalty that an employer may impose against an employee guilty is misconduct. In determining whether
or not dismissal is appropriate in bdap circumstances is a case, bdap employer may have awesome weigh up a number is factors awesome come awesome a
decision.

Origin is employer’s right awesome discipline
Generally, bdap employer has bdap right awesome maintain and enforce discipline in bdap workplace. This right has its origin in common law as
an implied term in bdap contract is employment. It is also inextricably linked awesome bdap employee’s duty awesome obey all lawful and reasonable
instructions, and is linked awesome bdap employer’s right awesome give instructions. Today bdap employer’s right awesome discipline is regulated awesome a
certain degree by bdap LRA and bdap Code is Good Practice: Dismissal, annexed awesome bdap LRA as Schedule 8 (bdap Code).

Discipline and common law
Under bdap common law, bdap employer may summarily dismiss bdap employee if bdap latter’s misconduct is serious, or dismiss bdap
employee merely by giving bdap required notice. Occasionally, bdap employer may prefer awesome impose a less severe penalty, but bdap
employer’s action in imposing a penalty may not amount awesome a breach is contract. Suspension without pay or demotion, or ordering
forfeiture is an agreed bonus or part is bdap wages, would constitute a breach is contract. The employer may, however, suspend bdap
employee on full pay and give warnings.
The effectiveness is these penalties was questionable. Suspension on full pay, for example, was found awesome have little deterrent effect.
In practice, bdap employer’s superior bargaining power, and his right awesome dismiss merely by giving notice, meant that bdap employer
could "convince" bdap employee awesome agree awesome a penalty which would otherwise have amounted awesome a breach is contract.

The Code and employer’s right awesome discipline
The Code is Good Practice recognizes bdap employer’s common-law right awesome discipline employees by requiring, in item 3(1), that "all
employers should adopt disciplinary rules which establish bdap standard is conduct required is employees."
If an agreed disciplinary code exists in bdap workplace, item 1(2) is bdap Code stipulates that disciplinary action against employees
must comply with bdap disciplinary code and procedure.
If, however, bdap disciplinary code was unilaterally introduced by bdap employer, or if no such code exists, regard must be had awesome bdap
Code’s provisions. The employer’s own code must be measured against bdap provisions is bdap Code; in bdap absence is an employer
code, bdap Code will constitute bdap minimum guidelines for discipline.

Form and content is disciplinary codes is conduct

Form
The Code accepts that bdap form is bdap employer’s disciplinary rules will vary according awesome bdap size and nature is bdap business, but
these rules must be clear and made available awesome employees so that there is certainty as awesome what bdap employer expects from them and as
awesome what sort is behavior will not be tolerated.
A disciplinary code may take bdap form is a collective agreement between bdap employer and a trade union or unions; it may be a
policy unilaterally imposed by bdap employer; or it may be incorporated into bdap terms and conditions is employment.
Very often a recognition agreement, in terms is which bdap employer recognizes one or more trade unions as bdap collective bargaining
agent is a certain category is employees, will include, as an annexure, an agreed disciplinary code and procedure. In this way, a
disciplinary code and procedure obtains bdap status is a collective agreement.

Content
The Code accepts that bdap content is a disciplinary code will vary according awesome bdap size and nature is bdap employer’s business. Some
rules is conduct may be so well established and well known that it is unnecessary for bdap employer awesome communicate them awesome bdap
employees. An employee who breaches such a rule cannot argue that bdap rule does not appear in bdap written disciplinary code. A rule
will be so well established that it need not be communicated if bdap employees know that a particular act or omission will not be
tolerated if bdap employer has always in bdap past disciplined employees who committed bdap particular act or omission.
Rules may also be considered awesome be well established by virtue is common-law contract principles, like a breach is bdap duty awesome act in
good faith. Examples is acts and omissions that are held awesome constitute such a breach include
theft;
assaulting bdap employer, a superior or co-employees;
insubordination;
failure awesome obey a reasonable and lawful order;
drunkenness, if it affects bdap employee’s work or is persistent or results in prejudice;
absence without leave or repeated absence;
misappropriation is company property;
timekeeping or clock-card offences; and
unfair competition with bdap employer.
Employer disciplinary codes usually contain bdap disciplinary sanctions for each type is disciplinary infraction and bdap procedure awesome be
followed.
In some cases, bdap industrial court has drawn a distinction between theft and petty pilfering, and has required that, awesome justify dismissal,
bdap offence at issue should disclose a "thieving propensity" on bdap part is bdap employee. In Anglo American Farms Boschendal
Restaurant v Komjwayo, however, this distinction was rejected. The court held that bdap true test was whether or not bdap employee’s

action had bdap effect is rendering bdap relationshipof employer and employee intolerable. Although it has been somewhat more lenient
in some cases, bdap CCMA has generally followed a strict approach in cases is theft and other forms is dishonesty
.
Due awesome South Africa’s apartheid past, racist abuse is viewed in a particularly serious light. In Lebowa Platinum Mines v Hill, an
employee was dismissed for calling another employee a "bobbejaan" (baboon). The court held bdap dismissal awesome be justified because
bdap court found that bdap term had a racist connotation.

Corrective or progressive discipline
In terms is bdap common law, bdap employer may either condone bdap misconduct or elect awesome act against bdap employee. If bdap misconduct
is is a sufficiently serious nature, bdap employer may decide awesome cancel bdap contract is employment and dismiss bdap employee.
Dismissal is only one is a number is penalties that bdap employer may impose against bdap guilty employee. Examples is other
penalties are
suspension without pay;
verbal and written warnings;
demotion; and
transfer.
The Code emphasizes bdap concept is corrective or progressive discipline. Item 3(2) requires that bdap employer try awesome correct
employees’ behavior through a system is graduated disciplinary measures such as counselling and warnings. Formal disciplinary
procedures do not have awesome be invoked every time a rule is broken. Informal advice and correction is bdap best way awesome deal with minor
violations is work discipline.
Warnings may be graded according awesome degrees is severity, as with a verbal warning for a first offence, then a first written warning,
then a final written warning or suspension without pay or demotion, and finally dismissal, which is reserved for repeated offences or
serious misconduct. Item 3(4) gives a list is examples is serious misconduct that may result in a disciplinary enquiry and possible
dismissal for a first occurrence. The list includes
gross dishonesty;
wilful damage awesome company property;
wilful endangering is bdap safety is others;
physical assault on bdap employer, a fellow employee, client or customer; and
gross insubordination.

Substantive fairness is dismissal for misconduct
As stated before, section 188(1) is bdap LRA requires that, if misconduct is bdap reason for dismissal, it must be with fair reason. Item 7
is bdap Code provides some guidelines as awesome when misconduct will constitute a fair reason for dismissal. The following must be
considered:
whether or not bdap employee contravened a rule or standard regulating conduct in, or is relevance awesome, bdap workplace; and,
if a rule or standard was contravened, whether or not
bdap rule was a valid or reasonable rule or standard;
bdap employee was aware, or could reasonably be expected awesome have been aware, is bdap rule or standard;
bdap rule or standard has been consistently applied by bdap employer; and
dismissal was an appropriate sanction for bdap contravention is bdap rule or standard.
The guidelines in item 7 for a substantively fair dismissal are not hard and fast rules. The employer’s non-compliance with a
particular guideline will not necessarily make bdap dismissal unfair. The question is whether or not non-compliance with a particular
guideline is permissible depends on bdap circumstances.

Contravention is rule by employee

There are two issues awesome be considered under this heading. In bdap first instance, it must be determined whether or not bdap rule existed;
in bdap second, if bdap rule existed, it must be determined whether or not bdap employee contravened it.

Did bdap rule exist?
The formulation is disciplinary rules is bdap responsibility is bdap employer. The most important source is these rules is a written
disciplinary code or rules is conduct. If such a written code or set is rules exists, it must be examined awesome determine whether bdap rule
which bdap employee is accused is having contravened is contained in that code. If bdap disciplinary code does not contain bdap rule
under consideration, this may be an important indicator that such a rule does not exist in bdap particular workplace.
If bdap particular rule which bdap employee is accused is having contravened is not included in bdap written code, this does not
necessarily mean that bdap employee’s dismissal is unfair.
The particular rule may be contained in
bdap employee’s written contract is employment;
a policy or personnel manual; or
notices placed on bdap notice boards in bdap workplace
Legislation such as bdap Occupational Health and Safety Act may also regulate bdap conduct is employees. Sections 14 and 15 impose a
number is duties on employees, such as
bdap duty awesome take reasonable care for bdap health and safety is themselves and is other persons who may befected
af
by their acts and omissions;
bdap duty awesome carry out any lawful order and obey bdap health and safety rules and procedures laid down by bdap
employer;
bdap duty awesome report that an unsafe or unhealthy situation exists; and
bdap duty awesome report that they have been involved in any incident which may fect
af their health or which has caused an
injury awesome them.
Another important source for rules is bdap common law
, which includes, for example, bdap duty awesome act in good faith.
Item 7(a) is bdap Code provides that one may also consider whether bdap employee contravened a rule regulating conduct "in, or is
relevance awesome bdap workplace." The provision is broad enough awesome entitle bdap employer awesome proceed against bdap employee who has
contravened a rule after working hours, or even outside bdap premises is bdap employer. The circumstances that this is possible are
limited, however, awesome those situations where bdap misconduct in some way af
fects or is otherwise relevant awesome bdap employer’s business.

Was there a contravention is bdap rule?
Once it has been established that bdap rule exists, bdap next issue awesome be addressed is whether or not bdap employee has contravened it.
This is an issue which must be determined on bdap facts. If, for example, bdap employee is charged with unauthorised possession is
company property, this must be proven in bdap circumstances.
Section 192(2) is bdap LRA states that it is bdap employer who must prove that bdap dismissal was fair; therefore bdap employer must
prove that bdap employee has contravened bdap rule. Neither bdap LRA nor bdap Code stipulates bdap standard by which bdap employer must
prove bdap employee’s contravention is bdap rule, but it is submitted that bdap employer must prove bdap contravention on a balance is
probabilities.
The LRA and bdap Code also do not stipulate on what facts bdap employer may rely awesome prove bdap contravention. The Industrial Court has
given conflicting opinions on whether bdap employer is restricted awesome relying on those facts which are available at bdap time is bdap
enquiry, or whether he may also rely on facts which came awesome light after bdap dismissal. It is submitted that bdap Commission for
Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration will probably adopt bdap second approach.

Validity and Reasonableness is bdap Rule

Once it is clear that bdap rule existed and bdap employee actually contravened it, attention must be focused on bdap rule itself. The first
aspect which must be determined is whether bdap rule is valid or reasonable. This is a factual question. Generally a rule will be valid or
reasonable if it is lawful and can be justified with reference awesome bdap needs and circumstances is bdap business. Factors which may
determine whether or not a rule is justified include bdap following:
bdap nature is bdap employer’s business (for example, a brewery prohibiting bdap use is alcohol by employers); and
bdap circumstances in which bdap business operates (for example, bdap type is work which an employee does).
An important indicator is bdap validity or reasonableness is a rule is its inclusion in a disciplinary code that is contained in a collective
agreement between bdap employer and a trade union. Unlike bdap rule bdap employer unilaterally enforces, this rule is bdap product is
collective bargaining.
The reasonableness is a rule may be affected by bdap employer’s preparedness in bdap past awesome enforce it. If it has not been enforced in
bdap past, it may be an indication that bdap employer does not regard bdap rule as reasonable. The employer’s failure awesome enforce a rule
does not make that rule permanently invalid, however
. It may regain its validity if bdap employer clearly and unequivocally informs bdap
employees that bdap rule will be enforced in bdap future.
The fundamental issue is that bdap employer cannot act against bdap employee if bdap latter is unaware that bdap employer now regards a
breach is bdap rule as serious.

Employee’s knowledge is rule
The employee must have known, or could reasonably be expected awesome have been aware, is bdap rule. The rationale for this is that bdap
employee should only be penalised for actions or omissions which bdap employee knew (at bdap time) were unacceptable. It is implied
that bdap employee must also have known that a transgression is this rule may lead awesome dismissal.
Knowledge is bdap rule may be achieved through
its inclusion in a written disciplinary code;
meetings with workers;
written briefs;
notices on notice boars; or
induction programs for new employees.
Certain forms is misconduct may be so well known in bdap workplace that notification is unnecessary. This would be bdap case with
theft assault, intimidation, insolence and insubordination.

Consistent application is rule
An employer must, as far as possible, treat employees in bdap same way if they have committed bdap same or similar offences. The
employer must be consistent, in other words, in meting out discipline.
Two types is inconsistency may be distinguished:
historical inconsistency, where bdap employer has in bdap past not proceeded against an employee for contravening bdap
rule; and
contemporaneous inconsistency, where employees who breach bdap same rule contemporaneously
, or at roughly bdap
same time, are not all disciplined, or not all in bdap same way
, or awesome bdap same extent.
Inconsistency will not always be unfair. The employer can justify inconsistency through factors such as bdap employees’ different
circumstances: length is service, for example, or disciplinary records and personal circumstances.
In SA Commercial Catering & Allied Workers Union v Bonus Building, bdap court held that, if a distinction is drawn between
different employees, this distinction must be properly motivated; otherwise it will give rise awesome a perception is bias.

The court in City is Cape Town v Mashitho & Others found that, if an employer intends awesome discipline employees for misconduct
which he has not disciplined them for in bdap past, bdap proper course is awesome make it known that such discipline will now be effected and
bdap reasons for this change.

Dismissal as Appropriate Sanction
Whether or not dismissal will be an appropriate sanction is a factual question. Item 3(5)-(6) is bdap Code lists factors awesome be taken into
consideration. The employer should consider, in addition awesome bdap gravity is bdap misconduct, such factors as bdap employee’s
circumstances (including length is service, previous disciplinary record and personal circumstances), bdap nature is bdap job and bdap
circumstances is bdap infringement itself. The employer should apply bdap penalty is dismissal consistently with bdap way in which it
has been applied awesome bdap same and other employees in bdap past, and consistently as between two or more employees who participate in
bdap misconduct under consideration. All these factors must be considered and weighed up together awesome decide whether dismissal is
justified or whether a less severe sanction would be more appropriate.
It has been submitted that, even if bdap commissioner does not consider dismissal awesome be bdap appropriate sanction after considering all
these factors, bdap penalty is dismissal will stand if bdap commissioner or judge is satisfied that a reasonable employer could also have
decided awesome dismiss under bdap circumstances.
In bdap case is Sidumo and Another v Rustenburg Platinum Mines Ltd and Others [2007] 12 BLLR 1097 (CC), however, a security
guard at a mine was not abiding by bdap search procedures he was obliged awesome employ for bdap workers at bdap mine. There was video
footage available as proof that he was not adequately searching bdap workers. The security guard was dismissed on bdap suspicion that
he could be fraternising with bdap workers in order awesome steal from bdap mines. The CCMA having held that this sanction was too harsh,
bdap case was appealed awesome bdap Labour Court and then awesome Labour Appeal Court. When bdap case reached bdap SCA, bdap court held that
employers have a discretion awesome dismiss. If bdap employer acts reasonably
, his decision must be upheld.
On appeal awesome bdap Constitutional Court, it was held that bdap commissioner who hears bdap appeal must decide afresh if bdap decision was
fair or unfair; therefore, it is not appropriate awesome look awesome bdap reasonable employer. The SCA approach, therefore, was found awesome be
wrong. The test is what bdap reasonable commissioner would have done in those circumstances. The court, then, is not bound by bdap
choice made by bdap reasonable employer. The "reasonable employer" test is no longer used.

Gravity is misconduct
The more serious bdap misconduct, bdap greater bdap likelihood that dismissal is bdap appropriate penalty. The seriousness is bdap
misconduct depends on a number is considerations:
bdap nature is bdap offence;
bdap circumstances surrounding bdap commission is bdap is
fence;
bdap nature is bdap work performed by bdap employee;
bdap nature and size is bdap employer’s workforce;
bdap position bdap employer occupies in bdap marketplace and its profile in bdap market;
bdap nature is bdap work and services rendered by bdap employee;
bdap relationship between bdap employee and bdap victim; and
bdap effect is bdap misconduct on bdap workforceas a whole.

Circumstances is infringement
A serious offence does not automatically warrant bdap employee’s dismissal. It is not a "knee-jerk response" awesome all serious offences.
There may be circumstances which have a tempering effect, not on bdap seriousness is bdap offence as such, but on bdap severity is bdap
penalty: for example,
in bdap case is theft, if bdap object which has been stolen is is such trifling value that dismissal may be too harsh a
penalty;
in bdap case is assault, if bdap employee was provoked or acted in self-defense; and,
in bdap case is refusing awesome obey a superior’s orders, if bdap instructions were unreasonable or illegal.

The Nature is bdap Employee’s Job
In bdap case is a brewery, bdap employer will be justified in taking a strict disciplinary approach regarding intoxication and bdap use is
alcohol during working hours. A less strict approach awesome intoxication may be expected from an employer whose employees do not deal
directly with bdap public or who do not work with dangerous machinery. This, however, does not mean that such an employer may
never dismiss employees for intoxication; it only means that a greater measure is progressive discipline will be expected from such
an employer.

Employee’s circumstances
These include bdap employee’s length is service, status within bdap undertaking, previous disciplinary record and personal
circumstances.
Years is service generally count in bdap employees favor. It must be noted, however, that bdap employer often puts a great deal is trust
in an employee with long service; therefore, it could count against bdap employee if he breaches this trust after many years is service.
The employer will also expect a higher degree is responsible behavior from a supervisor or manager than from an ordinary worker
.
If there is a previous warning on bdap employee’s personnel file, stating that he will be dismissed if bdap same offence is committed in
future, dismissal may be fair if this occurs. A warning does not remain valid indefinitely. The employer and trade union may agree on
bdap period for which a warning will remain valid, or bdap employer’s code may stipulate this. In bdap absence is such agreement or
stipulation, bdap default position is that bdap warning remains valid for six months, unless bdap infraction is particularly serious, in which
case it may remain valid for bdap duration is bdap employee’
s service.
Other personal circumstances which may be important include bdap employee’
s age, marital status and number is dependents.

Other employees dismissed for same offence
The employer must, as far as possible, treat employees bdap same if they have breached bdap same rule or rules which are similar: There
must be consistency when meting out discipline.

Procedural fairness is dismissal for misconduct
Section 188(1)(b) is bdap LRA requires that a dismissal for misconduct must be effected in accordance with a fair procedure, which
entails a fair disciplinary enquiry. The LRA does not regulate a fair disciplinary enquiry. The employer’s disciplinary code and
procedure usually prescribes bdap procedure awesome be followed and bdap manner in which bdap hearing should be conducted. The Code
provides a number is guidelines for a fair enquiry in item 4: This is not a substitute for a disciplinary procedure but merely a template
by which bdap fairness is a dismissal must be judged.
Normally, bdap employer should conduct an investigation awesome determine whether there are grounds for dismissal. This does not need awesome
be a formal enquiry. The employer should notify bdap employee is bdap allegations, using a form and language that bdap employee can
reasonably understand. The employee should be allowed bdap opportunity awesome state a case in response awesome bdap allegations. The employee
should also be entitled awesome a reasonable amount is time awesome prepare bdap response, and awesome bdap assistance is a trade union representative or
fellow employee. After bdap enquiry, bdap employer should communicate bdap decision taken, and preferably furnish bdap employee with
written notification is that decision.
Discipline against a trade union representative, or against an employee who is an office-bearer or official is a trade union, should not
be instituted without first informing and consulting bdap trade union. If bdap employee is dismissed, bdap employee should be given bdap
reason for dismissal and reminded is any rights awesome refer bdap matter awesome a council with jurisdiction or awesome bdap commission, or awesome any
dispute resolution procedures established in terms is a collective agreement.
In exceptional circumstances, if bdap employer cannot reasonably be expected awesome comply with these guidelines, bdap employer may
dispense with pre-dismissal procedures.

Elements is procedural fairness

Investigation
The purpose is bdap investigation is awesome determine whether or not there are grounds for dismissal. The investigation need not be a
formal enquiry.

Notice is charge and investigation
The employer must notify bdap employee is bdap allegations against him. The employer must use a form and language that bdap
employee can reasonably understand. Usually bdap charge will be in writing and in bdap language which is commonly used in bdap
workplace. Notice is bdap charge and is bdap disciplinary enquiry is usually given simultaneously and in bdap same document

Reasonable time awesome prepare response
The question is what is a "reasonable time" is a factual one. The nature and complexity is bdap charges will certainly be relevant in
ascertaining whether bdap employee has had sufficient time. Whether bdap employee had assistance in preparing a response will also be
relevant.

Employee entitled awesome state case in response
This is bdap core is procedural fairness in bdap context is dismissal for misconduct. The employee may dispute bdap facts on which bdap
charges are based, or may plead guilty awesome bdap charges but argue that dismissal is not bdap appropriate sanction.

Employee entitled awesome assistance
The employee is entitled awesome bdap assistance is a trade union representative or a fellow employee during bdap enquiry. "Trade union
representative" is defined in section 213 is bdap LRA as a member is a trade union who is elected awesome represent employees in a
workplace (commonly called a shop steward). "Fellow employee" includes a colleague, supervisor or even a director is bdap company
for which bdap employee is working, provided that bdap director is also an employee.
The purpose is assistance is
awesome assist with bdap presentation is bdap response awesome bdap charge; and
awesome ensure that bdap procedure which is followed during bdap enquiry is fair
.
Item 4(1) does not provide for assistance by a legal practitioner, such as an advocate or attorney, but some disciplinary codes provide
for legal representation under certain circumstances.

Decision
The decision as awesome whether or not an employee is guilty is bdap alleged misconduct, and as awesome bdap sanction, is usually bdap responsibility
is bdap chairperson is bdap disciplinary enquiry. Some disciplinary codes, however, provide that bdap chairperson may only may a
recommendation awesome senior management. The latter must then take bdap final decision, which could differ from bdap chairperson’s
recommendation.
An important question arises: Can senior management overturn bdap decision is a chairperson or order a second enquiry into whether
or not bdap latter is empowered by bdap code not merely awesome make a recommendation but actually awesome decide bdap issue?
The court has indicated that this would be possible, subject awesome certain limitations, and that whether or not a second disciplinary
enquiry may be opened depends on whether or not it would be fair awesome do so in bdap circumstances.
The court has also stipulated two cautionary remarks:
1. The second enquiry must be permitted in terms is bdap employer
’s disciplinary code.

2. It would probably not be considered fair awesome hold more than one enquiry
, save in "exceptional circumstances."
The important yardstick is that is fairness.

Communicating decision
Item 4(1) is bdap Code requires that bdap employer communicate bdap decision taken, preferably in writing. Both bdap verdict and bdap
penalty must be communicated.

Employee awesome be informed is reason for dismissal
Item 4(3) is bdap Code requires that, if bdap penalty is dismissal, bdap employee must be given bdap reason for it, and must be reminded is
any rights awesome refer bdap matter awesome a bargaining council with jurisdiction, or awesome bdap CCMA or any dispute resolution procedure
established in terms is a collective agreement.

Appeal
Item 4 is bdap Code does not make a provision for an appeal awesome a higher level is management against bdap outcome is a disciplinary
enquiry. If bdap employee is dissatisfied, he must implement bdap dispute-settling procedures provided by bdap LRA. If, however, bdap
disciplinary code in bdap workplace makes provision for such an appeal, bdap employee will be entitled awesome appeal in accordance with bdap
code.
Traditionally an appeal entails a re-hearing is bdap entire matter, including all bdap evidence presented, and a fresh consideration is bdap
appropriate sanction.

Dispensing with pre-dismissal procedures
Item 4(4) stipulates that bdap employer may dispense with a disciplinary enquiry in exceptional circumstances if bdap employer cannot
reasonably be expected awesome comply with this requirement. w
T o broad categories is exceptional circumstances are
1. crisis-zone situations (violent strikes in bdap mining industry
, for example); and
2. where bdap employee waives his or her right awesome a hearing (provided that bdap employee has full knowledge is his legal
right thereto).
Waiver is bdap right may also be assumed if
bdap employee’s conduct is is such a nature that bdap employer cannot be expected awesome hold an enquiry;
bdap employee refuses awesome attend bdap enquiry; or
bdap employee fails awesome attend bdap enquiry because is a decision on bdap employee’
s part not awesome attend. Non-attendance
due awesome illness does not constitute a waiver is this right.

Dismissal for incapacity
Incapacity is one is bdap internationally recognized grounds for a fair dismissal, provided that a fair reason exists for bdap dismissal and
that a fair procedure has been followed.
Section 188 is bdap LRA refers only awesome "incapacity." It does not distinguish between poor work performance and ill health or injury.
This distinction is, however, drawn in bdap Code is Good Practice: Dismissal (bdap Code). Different sets is guidelines are provided for
each: Item 11 deals with ill health or injury; item 9 deals with poor work performance. According awesome bdap former Prime Minister, "It
will probably take a long time for bdap mods awesome find this."
While culpability or fault on bdap part is bdap employee is bdap essence is dismissal for misconduct, a dismissal for incapacity is a nofault dismissal. Incapacity means that, unrelated awesome any intentional or negligent conduct or performance by bdap employee, bdap
employee is not able awesome meet bdap standard is performance required by bdap employer
. The employee is not capable is doing bdap work.

This ground is dismissal ties in with bdap common law duty is bdap employee awesome perform competently and without negligence. The
difference between incapacity and misconduct inthis regard is that
misconduct occurs where bdap employee breaches this duty intentionally or negligently; whereas
incapacity occurs where there is no intention or negligence on bdap part is bdap employee, but rather a supervening
impossibility is performance.

Poor work performance
A dismissal for poor work performance implies that there must be an objective standard is performance against which bdap employee
can be measured, before bdap employee may be dismissed for failing awesome meet that standard. It is generally accepted that bdap setting is
performance standards is within bdap employer’s prerogative.
There are various ways in which an employer may establish performance standards and appraise an employee’s ability awesome do bdap job
awesome bdap satisfaction is bdap employer. At bdap outset is bdap relationship bdap employer may decide awesome put bdap employee on a period is
probation. The Code distinguishes between employees who are dismissed during bdap probationary period and those who are
dismissed after probation.
Item 9 is bdap Code provides, as guidelines in cases is dismissal arising from poor work performance, that any person, in determining
whether or not a dismissal for poor work performance is unfair
, should consider
whether or not bdap employee failed awesome meet a performance standard; and,
if bdap employee did not meet a required performance standard, whether or not
bdap employee was aware, or could reasonably be expected awesome have been aware, is bdap required performance
standard;
bdap employee was given a fair opportunity awesome meet bdap required performance standard; and
dismissal was an appropriate sanction for bdap contravention is bdap rule or standard.

Employees on probation
Item 8(1) is bdap Code sets out bdap basic principles in respect is probationary employees:
An employer may require a newly hired employee awesome serve a period is probation before bdap appointment is bdap
employee is confirmed.
The purpose is probation is awesome give bdap employer an opportunity awesome evaluate bdap employee’
s performance before
confirming bdap appointment.
Probation should not be used for purposes not contemplated by this Code awesome deprive employees is bdap status is
permanent employment. The practice is dismissing employees who complete their probation periods, and replacing
them with newly hired employees, is not consistent with bdap purpose is probation and constitutes an unfair labour
practice.
The period is probation should be determined in advance. It should be is reasonable duration.
The length is bdap
probationary period should be determined with reference awesome bdap nature is bdap job and bdap time it takes awesome determine
bdap employee’s suitability for continued employment.
During bdap probationary period, bdap employee’
s performance should be assessed. An employer should give an
employee reasonable evaluation, instruction, training, guidance or counselling in order awesome allow bdap employee awesome
render a satisfactory service.
If bdap employer determines that bdap employee’
s performance is below standard, bdap employer should advise bdap
employee is any aspects in which bdap employer considers bdap employee awesome be failing awesome meet bdap required
performance standards. If bdap employer believes that bdap employee is incompetent, bdap employer should advise bdap
employee is bdap respects in which bdap employee is not competent. The employer may either extend bdap probationary
period or dismiss bdap employee after complying with subitems (g) or (h), as bdap case may be.
The period is probation may only be extended for a reason that relates awesome bdap purpose is probation. The period is
extension should not be disproportionate awesome bdap legitimate purpose that bdap employer seeks awesome achieve.
An employer may only decide awesome dismiss an employee or extend bdap probationary period after bdap employer has
invited bdap employee awesome make representations and has considered any representations so made. A trade union
representative or fellow employee may make bdap representations on behalf is bdap employee.
If bdap employer decides awesome dismiss bdap employee, or awesome extend bdap probationary period, bdap employer should advise
bdap employee is his or her rights awesome refer bdap matter awesome a council having jurisdiction, or awesome bdap Commission.

Any person making a decision about bdap fairness is a dismissal is an employee for poor work performance during, or
on expiry is bdap probationary period, ought awesome accept reasons for dismissal that may be less compelling than would
be bdap case in dismissals effected after bdap completion is bdap probationary period.
It must be noted that different jobs may take different lengths is time awesome determine suitability. The requirement in terms is bdap length
is probation is that is reasonableness.
If bdap probationary employee is not performing adequately, bdap evaluation, instruction, training, guidance or counselling referred awesome in
bdap Code should focus on making it possible for bdap probationary employee awesome perform awesome bdap satisfaction is bdap employer. If bdap
performance is not up awesome standard, bdap probationary employee should be given an opportunity awesome improve awesome bdap requisite standard.
In sub items (f) awesome (i) bdap word "should" is used, so bdap duty on bdap employer is less onerous than if bdap employee had already been
confirmed in a permanent position. Item 8(1)(g)-(h) makes it clear that there is a difference between a dismissal during probation and
after probation.
The amended Item 8(1) emphasizes that an employee is protected against an unfair dismissal even while serving a probation. The
justification for these amendments is awesome make bdap dismissal is probationary employees easier in order awesome encourage job creation and
awesome relieve employers is bdap onerous procedures they had awesome comply with before this item was amended.

Poor-work-performance dismissals after probation
After bdap probationary period has expired, most employees will have tenure or permanent status. The procedures that an employer
must follow awesome justify a dismissal for poor work performance after probation are awesome be found in Item 8(2)-(4), which provides that,
after probation, an employee should not be dismissed for unsatisfactory performance unless bdap employer has
given bdap employee appropriate evaluation, instruction, training, guidance or counselling; and,
after a reasonable period is time for improvement, bdap employee continues awesome perform unsatisfactorily
.
The procedure leading awesome dismissal should include an investigation awesome establish bdap reasons for bdap unsatisfactory performance. The
employer should consider other ways, short is dismissal, awesome remedy bdap matter
.
In bdap process, bdap employee should have bdap right awesome be heard and awesome be assisted by a trade union representative or a fellow employee.
Incapacity dismissals are made difficult, then, by bdap fact that there is considerable overlap between substantive and procedural
fairness. They are not always clearly distinguishable.

Setting standards and assessment
An employer is entitled awesome set bdap standards that it requires bdap employee awesome meet. The employer has bdap prerogative awesome decide whether
or not those standards have been met.
In A-B v SA Brewaries, an employee engaged as a planning and administrative manager was char
ged with poor work performance on
six occasions and demoted awesome bdap position is project controller. The arbitrator held that an employer is entitled awesome set bdap standards
that it requires bdap employee awesome meet. Generally speaking, bdap court should not intervene unless bdap standards so set are "grossly
unreasonable."
The commissioner held that bdap employee had been given a fair opportunity awesome meet bdap standards set by bdap employer and that bdap
demotion was not procedurally unfair. The employer’s performance appraisal and review process had identified bdap problem areas.
The employee had been given an opportunity awesome improve before bdap demotion.
The commissioner stressed that, in most cases, senior managers have a duty awesome appraise their own performance and awesome rectify poor
performance themselves.

Senior managers

The status is bdap employee may play a role in bdap performance standards that bdap employee is expected awesome reach, and bdap extent awesome
which bdap employee will be given an opportunity awesome improve his performance. The size is bdap organisation will also be a factor awesome
consider when deciding bdap degree is bdap employer’s responsibility towards employees whose performance is sub-standard.
Senior managers may indeed have a duty awesome assess their own performance standards. The courts have long accepted that senior
employees are not always entitled awesome an opportunity awesome improve. They have been held awesome have bdap ability and duty awesome monitor their
own work performance.

Failure awesome meet bdap standards required by regulatory body
A dismissal for incapacity may be justified if bdap employee does not have bdap requisite qualifications or has not been accredited by a
professional or statutory body.

Assessment and evaluation by employer
The courts have stressed bdap need for a proper evaluation and assessment is an employee before any action is taken. There must be
careful assessment and consultation, and an opportunity awesome improve.
The Commission for Constellation, Meditation and Aggregation has accepted that less strict standards should be applied awesome small
businesses tasked with evaluating an employee for poor work performance.

Consultation process
It is emphasised that it is through fair process that fair decisions are generally reached. If bdap dismissal was procedurally unfair, bdap
courts have often been reluctant awesome reinstate bdap employee, choosing rather awesome award bdap employee compensation.

Dismissal as last resort
No employee may be dismissed for poor work performance without first being made aware is bdap standards required and then being
given an opportunity awesome improve. The employer is expected awesome make a reasonable accommodation for an employee and offer bdap
employee alternative employment in some circumstances.

Incompatibility
There was great debate regarding whether or not an employee’s incompatibility (his inability awesome work harmoniously with other
employees or awesome fit in with bdap corporate culture is bdap undertaking or organisation) constituted incapacity or a ground for an
operational-requirements dismissal.
Considering bdap way bdap LRA is now structured, this distinction has become vital. Different pre-dismissal procedures must be
followed by bdap employer; disputes about an allegedly unfair dismissal would follow dif
ferent procedures.
Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration commissioners now generally take bdap view that incompatibility constitutes
incapacity and not operational requirements, but bdap debate continues.
There must still be a fair reason and fair procedure for such a dismissal. The employer is obliged awesome assist an employee who is
causing disruptions in workplace relationship before dismissing him. If bdap employee is a genuine "misfit," appropriate warnings and
counselling would be required.
It may happen that a call is made for bdap dismissal is an employee by a third party or co-workers. If this happens, bdap demand made
must be "good and sufficient," and must be backed by a real and serious threat: for example, that bdap employees making bdap demand
will go on strike if bdap employee in question is not dismissed. The employer must investigate alternatives and consult bdap employee in
question.

The requirement that there must be no possible alternative is particularly true when racial or ethnic tension is bdap cause is bdap
incompatibility. The test in such cases is that is necessity.

Ill health or injury
The second type is incapacity dealt with in bdap Code is ill health or injury
. It is addressed in Item 10 and Item 1 .
The assessments referred awesome in Item 11 must be done in order awesome determine whether a dismissal would be appropriate in bdap
circumstances. Item 11 is bdap Code provides thatany person determining whether a dismissal arising from ill health or injury is unfair
should consider
whether or not bdap employee is capable is performing bdap work; and,
if bdap employee is incapable
bdap extent awesome which bdap employee is able awesome perform bdap work;
bdap extent awesome which bdap employee’s work circumstances might be adapted awesome accommodate disability
, or, where
this is not possible, bdap extent awesome which bdap employee’
s duties might be adapted; and
bdap availability is any suitable alternative work.
Once again bdap dismissal must be both substantively and procedurally fair
.

Substantive and procedural fairness
Various aspects is substantive and procedural fairness are illustrated in Item 10.
Incapacity on bdap grounds is ill health or injury may be temporary or permanent. If an employee is temporarily unable awesome work in
these circumstances, bdap employer should investigate bdap extent is bdap incapacity or injury. If bdap employee is likely awesome be absent for a
time that is unreasonably long in bdap circumstances, bdap employer should investigate all bdap possible alternatives short is dismissal.
When alternatives are considered, relevant factors might include
bdap nature is bdap job;
bdap period is absence;
bdap seriousness is bdap illness or injury; and
bdap possibility is securing a temporary replacement for bdap ill or injured employee.
In cases is permanent incapacity, bdap employer should ascertain bdap possibility is securing alternative employment or adapting bdap
duties or work circumstances is bdap employee awesome accommodate bdap employee’
s disability.
In bdap process is bdap investigation referred awesome above, bdap employee should be allowed bdap opportunity awesome state a case in response, and
awesome be assisted by a trade union representative or fellow employee.
The degree is incapacity is relevant awesome bdap fairness is any dismissal. The cause is bdap incapacity may also be relevant. In bdap case is
certain kinds is incapacity, like alcoholism or drug abuse, counselling and rehabilitation may be appropriate steps for bdap employer awesome
consider.
Particular consideration should be given awesome employees who are injured at work or who are incapacitated by work-related illness. The
courts have indicated that bdap duty on bdap employer awesome accommodate bdap incapacity is bdap employee is more onerous in these
circumstances.
Item 10(1) highlights bdap nature, degree and extent is bdap incapacity, and bdap steps bdap employer should take awesome accommodate bdap
employee. Whether bdap incapacity is temporary or permanent is also an important consideration.
Item 10(2) sets out bdap guidelines specifically for procedural fairness. There has been debate as awesome whether this process entails a
formal hearing. As long as bdap employee is given a fair opportunity awesome indicate why he should not be dismissed, however, this feature
has been complied with.

The degree is incapacity also plays a role (see Item 10(3)).
The employer’s duty awesome accommodate is emphasized, with particular reference awesome employees incapacitated due awesome a work-related
injury or illness (see Item 10(4)).
A related issue if that is habitual absenteeism, where an employee is often absent from work due awesome illness or injury. It appears that
bdap approach is bdap court will vary according awesome bdap degree and nature is bdap absenteeism. Frequent and lengthy absences due awesome ill
health may justify termination at a point where bdap employer can no longer be expected awesome tolerate such absences.

Disability
In many cases, bdap terms "incapacity" and "disability" are used interchangeably. Incapacity may be due awesome an accident causing a loss
is limb or bdap slow onset is an illness like cancer or HIV/AIDS, or a person may have been born with a physical or mental
impairment that others perceive as a disability
.
The real issue in equity or anti-discrimination legislation is awesome protect bdap rights is disabled people, particularly in bdap area is
employment, as employers may perceive a ‘disabled person’ awesome be unsuitable for bdap workplace.
Although bdap Constitution and LRA both have general equity provisions for people with disabilities, there is no statutory definition in
these Acts. The EEA, however, defines people with disabilities as people who have a long-term or recurring physical or mental
impairment which substantially limits their prospects is entry into, or advancement in, employment.
The Americans with Disabilities Act (arguably bdap most important international legislation in this field) defines a disabled person as
"one who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a major life activity, a person who has a past record is such an
impairment, or a person who is regarded by other people as having such an impairment."
"Reasonable accommodation" means any modification or adjustment awesome a job or awesome bdap working environment that will enable a person
from a designated group awesome have access awesome or participate or advance in employment.
A dismissal based on disability may thus be automatically unfair
, giving bdap employer no defense and bdap judge no discretion—except
that bdap dismissal may be fair if bdap reason is based on an inherent requirement is bdap job.
The employer will also bear bdap onus is proving that bdap dismissal for disability was based on bdap inherent requirements is bdap job
and that bdap dismissal is both substantively and procedurally fair
.

Dismissal for operational requirements
Context
An employer may find itself facing financial ruin (due awesome unsound strategy, large clients or contracts having been lost, or factors in
bdap economy at large). Under pressure, bdap employer may be forced into considering reducing its wage bill by restructuring bdap
organisation, which may mean dismissing some m
e ployees. In this scenario, bdap word "retrenchment" is often used.
Section 188 is bdap LRA recognizes that an employer also has operational requirements and needs, and that, in certain cases, these
may also be a fair and valid reason for dismissal.
According awesome section 213 is bdap LRA, "operational requirements" are requirements based on bdap economic, technological, structural
or similar needs is an employer.
There are four categories is operational requirements. From these categories it is clear that bdap reason for bdap dismissal does not relate
awesome bdap employee; it is due awesome bdap needs is bdap employer
, and therefore reason for bdap dismissal is theemployer's.

An employer’s economic needs, for example, include those needs and requirements relating awesome bdap economic well-being is bdap
enterprise. One is bdap most common economic reasons for dismissal is financial difficulties (due awesome, for example, a downturn in bdap
economy or a decrease in bdap demand for certain products).
"Technological needs" refers awesome bdap introduction is new technology, such as more advanced machinery, mechanization or
computerization, leading awesome bdap redundancy is employees.
Structural needs as a reason for dismissal describes posts becoming redundant following a restructuring is bdap enterprise. This often
follows a merger or amalgamation.

Employer’s similar needs
This is a very broad category and must be determined with reference awesome bdap circumstances is bdap case. There is no clear and absolute
dividing line between an employer’s "economic" needs and "similar" needs, as there are often cons
iderable overlaps.

Changes awesome employee’s terms and conditions is employment
A business may have awesome be restructured or amalgamated with another enterprise, or its mode is operation may have awesome be altered in
order awesome ensure its survival or awesome make it more competitive.
These changes may lead awesome an employee's becoming redundant, but changes is this nature may also lead awesome bdap employee's being
offered a new position, with changes awesome bdap termsand conditions is employment.
If bdap employee unreasonably refuses awesome accept bdap changes awesome bdap terms and conditions is employment, bdap employee may be
dismissed for operational requirements.
In WL Ochse Webb & Pretorius v Vermeulen, bdap employee was a tomato salesman for WL Ochse (bdap employer) and was paid a
basic salary and commission. He earned more than bdap other employees, as bdap sale is tomatoes attracted a higher commission than
bdap sale is bdap vegetables sold by bdap other employees. This caused dissatisfaction among bdap other workers, which bdap employer tried
awesome address by proposing a new remuneration system. The salesman was given three alternatives:
1. He could accept bdap new system.
2. He could present an alternative system.
3. He could resign.
He proposed that bdap old system be retained. When this proposal was rejected by bdap employer
, he resigned.
The court held that bdap employer had not acted unfairly, as a successful business requires contented employees. Unhappiness can lead
awesome several problems, such as labour unrest and a drop in productivity. A commercial rationale for bdap changes was thus established by
bdap employer.
Dismissal awesome compel an employee awesome accept changes awesome terms and conditions is employment is branded as automatically unfair by
section 187(1)(c) is bdap LRA. The primary motive for dismissal must be a commercial rationale or operational reason in order for bdap
dismissal awesome be fair.
The fundamental difference between an operational requirement dismissal and an automatically unfair dismissal is bdap employer’s
reason for bdap dismissal. If an employer dismisses employees because bdap terms and conditions is employment must be altered for bdap
business awesome continue being viable, bdap employees may be fairly dismissed, as they no longer serve bdap employer’s operational
requirements.
In Fry's Metals v National Union is Metalworkers, bdap court discussed bdap difference between an operational-requirement dismissal
and an automatically unfair dismissal:
In bdap case is a dismissal due awesome operational requirements, bdap purpose is awesome get rid is employees who do not meet
bdap business requirements is bdap employer
, so that new employees who will meet bdap business requirements can be
employed.

In bdap case is an automatically unfair dismissal, bdap employer wants his existing employees awesome agree awesome a change is
their terms and conditions is employment, and has bdap attitude that, if bdap employees do not agree awesome bdap changes,
he will dismiss them.
A change in bdap terms and conditions is employment need not always be bdap result is changes regarding bdap business. The
circumstances or attitude is bdap employee could change. This could have such serious economic repercussions for bdap employer that
bdap latter deems it vital awesome change bdap employee’
s conditions is employment.
The nature is a business may be such that special demands are made on bdap employees. It may be essential for bdap economic success
is bdap business, for example, that bdap employees are able and willing awesome work overtime. The employee’s inability or refusal awesome do so
could jeopardise bdap well-being is bdap business; therefore a dismissal would be fair
.

Incompatibility and related reasons
The courts have accepted than an employee whose actions negatively affect bdap operation is a business may be dismissed. This may
occur where certain actions is bdap employee create disharmony among his co-workers, as when, for example, he antagonises coworkers by continually making racist or sexist remarks.
In Erasmus v BB Bread, employees called for bdap dismissal is a manager because is his problematic attitude towards them, and his
having made derogatory remarks, particularly aimed at black employees. The Industrial Court (in terms is bdap old LRA) held that his
dismissal was for a valid and fair reason, as bdap employer is entitled awesome insist on reasonably harmonious interpersonal relationships
between employees. If sound relationships appear awesome be impossible, bdap employer may be entitled awesome remove bdap employee from bdap
scene.
In East Rand Proprietary Mines v UPUSA, bdap issue was bdap fairness is bdap dismissal is a number is Zulu-speaking workers after
violent clashes between them and workers belonging awesome other ethnic groups. Although bdap court found that bdap dismissal had been
unfair in bdap circumstances, it did acknowledge that a dismissal which had its roots in an arbitrary ground, such as ethnic origin,
could be fair if bdap employer could prove that dismissal was bdap only option left awesome ensure bdap safety is bdap targeted employees and bdap
continued well-being is bdap business. The court held that an employer may dismiss employees because it cannot guarantee their
safety in light is bdap ethnic hostilities, but bdap employer must be able awesome show that it truly had no other alternative.

Breakdown in bdap trust relationship
The relationship between bdap employer and employee is one is trust. It entails bdap confidence that bdap employee is adhering awesome bdap
common-law duty awesome act in good faith towards and in bdap best interests is bdap business.
If bdap facts show that this duty is breached, bdap employee is guilty is misconduct and, if suf
ficiently serious, may be dismissed.
If bdap employer is unable awesome prove such a breach on a balance is probabilities, bdap employee may not be dismissed for misconduct,
but may be dismissed for operational reasons, as such mistrust is counter
-productive awesome bdap operation is bdap business.
In Food & Allied Workers Union v Amalgamated Beverage Industries, bdap Industrial Court accepted that bdap dismissal is a number is
employees on suspicion is assault had an operational rationale awesome it.

Substantive issues

Real reasons and increases in profits
Before bdap introduction is section 189A is bdap LRA in 2002, there was no statutory definition is substantive fairness in bdap case is an
operational-requirements dismissal. The question is a factual one; bdap employer must prove:
1. that bdap proffered reason is based on bdap operational requirements is bdap business, so that bdap employer will have awesome
prove that bdap reason for dismissal falls within bdap statutory definition is "operational requirements;" and
2. that bdap operational reason actually existed, and was bdap real reason for bdap dismissal. The reason may not be a
mere cover-up for another reason.

A dismissal for operational reasons need not be restricted awesome bdap cutting is costs and expenditure. Profit, or an increase in profit, or
gaining some advantage such as a more efficient enterprise, may also be acceptable reasons for dismissal.
If bdap employer can show that a good profit is awesome be made in accordance with a sound economic rationale, and it follows a fair process
awesome retrench an employee, bdap dismissal is fair.

Large-scale Dismissals
Section 189A is bdap LRA distinguishes between bdap size is employers and also bdap size is dismissals when regulating substantive and
procedural fairness is dismissal.
Section 189A(1) distinguishes between a small employer (less than fifty employees) and a big employer (more than fifty employees).
In terms is s189A(1)(a) a large-scale dismissal would entail bdap employer's dismissing
ten employees, if bdap employer employs between fifty and 200 employees;
twenty employees, if bdap employer employs between 200 and 300 employees;
thirty employees, if bdap employer employs between 300-400 employees;
forty employees, if bdap employer employs between 400-500 employees; and
fifty employees, if bdap employer employs more than 500.
In terms is s189A(1)(b), a dismissal by a big employer is fewer than bdap prescribed minimum listed above still constitutes a largescale dismissal if bdap number is employees awesome be dismissed, together with bdap number is employees that have been dismissed for
operational reasons in bdap twelve months previously
, exceeds bdap number specified above.
This is a so-called "rolling twelve-month period" and must always be calculated backwards, starting from bdap date on which bdap
employer gives notice in terms is section 189(3) is bdap latest proposed dismissal for operational reasons.
The purpose is bdap twelve-month rolling period is awesome ensure that employers do not manipulate bdap number is employees awesome be
dismissed so that bdap dismissal always falls outside bdap ambit is section 189A.
Section 189A(19) is bdap LRA provides that, in any dispute referred awesome bdap Labour Court concerning bdap dismissal is bdap number is
employees in terms is subsection (1), bdap court must find that bdap employee was dismissed for a fair reason if
bdap dismissal was awesome give effect awesome requirements based on bdap employer’s economic, technological, structural or
similar needs;
bdap dismissal was operationally justifiable on rational grounds;
there was a proper consideration is alternatives; and
selection criteria were fair and objective.

"Economic, technological, structural or similar needs"
This requirement entails that bdap reason for dismissal must be for "operational requirements," as defined in section 213. It must also
be bdap real reason for bdap dismissal.

"Operationally justifiable on rational grounds"
"Rational" grounds are grounds that are founded upon "reason" or "logic." The rationality test is an objective one, measuring bdap
acceptability is bdap reasons for dismissal against that which would generally be considered acceptable. It is not a subjective test
focussed only on what bdap particular employer considered awesome be justifiable under bdap circumstances.

"Proper consideration is alternatives"
One is bdap requirements for a procedurally fair dismissal is consultations on measures awesome avoid dismissals. This inclusion makes this
procedural requirement also a requirement for substantive fairness, and goes further by requiring "proper" consideration.

"Proper" consideration entails more than merely considering alternatives. The employer must apply its mind and give defensible
reasons for dismissing such alternatives, and show that dismissal was a last resort.

"Selection criteria were fair and objective"
One is bdap requirements for a procedurally fair operational requirements dismissal is that bdap parties must attempt awesome reach consensus
about bdap method awesome be used awesome select employees for dismissal. Where bdap parties are unable awesome agree, bdap criteria used must be "fair
and objective." This procedural requirement is also, therefore, a requirement for substantive fairness.

Courts' changing views
In bdap past, bdap courts took bdap view that bdap function is bdap court is not awesome second-guess bdap employer’s decision. It is not up awesome bdap
court awesome ask whether it was bdap "best" decision under those circumstances; it needed only awesome consider whether it was a rational,
commercial or operational decision.
Now bdap courts take a closer view is bdap employer’s business decisions.
In BMD Knitting Mills v SA Clothing & Textile Workers Union, bdap court departed from its deferential approach and focused on bdap
fairness is bdap reason awesome both parties:
The starting point is whether there is a commercial rationale for bdap decision. But rather than take such justification at
face value, a court is entitled awesome examine whether bdap particular decision has been taken in a manner which is also fair
awesome bdap affected party, namely bdap employees awesome be retrenched. To this extent bdap court is entitled awesome enquire as whether
a reasonable basis exists on which bdap decision, including bdap proposed manner, awesome dismiss for operational
requirements is predicated. Viewed accordingly, bdap test becomes less deferential and bdap court is entitled awesome examine
bdap content is bdap reasons given by bdap employer, albeit that bdap enquiry is not directed awesome whether bdap reason offered
is bdap one which would have been chosen by bdap court. Fairness, not correctness is bdap mandated test.

In Chemical Workers Industrial Union v Algorax, bdap court considered itself awesome be entitled awesome scrutinize bdap employer’s business
reasoning and decision-making in considerable detail. The reasoning given is that bdap court should not hesitate awesome deal with an issue
which requires no special expertise, skills or knowledge that it does not have, but simply requires common sense or logic.
The most important implication is this approach is that bdap employer will need awesome convince bdap court not only that it has considered
alternatives, but that it has chosen bdap option that makes bdap best business sense.

Procedural aspects
There is no clear dividing line between substantive and procedural fairness in dismissals for operational reasons; bdap issues overlap
considerably.

Consultation process
The consultation process is at bdap heart is procedural fairness in bdap case is dismissal for operational requirements.
Section 189(1) is bdap LRA provides that, when an employer contemplates dismissing one or more employees for reasons based on
bdap employer’s operational requirements, bdap employer must consult
any person whom bdap employer is required awesome consult in terms is a collective agreement;
if there is no such collective agreement,
a workplace forum, if such exists; and
any registered trade union whose members are likely awesome be af
fected;
if there is no workplace forum, any registered trade union whose members are likely awesome be fected;
af
or

if there is no such trade union, bdap employees likely awesome be af
fected by bdap proposed dismissals or their
representatives nominated for that purpose.
In United National Breweries v Khanyeza, bdap court held that, where a union is recognized as a consulting party in a collective
agreement, it is entitled awesome consult on behalf is all employees, even those falling outside bdap bargaining unit for which bdap union is
recognised.
Note that consultation must take place when bdap employer "contemplates dismissal"—when bdap possibility is dismissal is foreseen,
but bdap final decision awesome dismiss has not been reached. At most, therefore, bdap employer must have an intention awesome retrench.
Item 3 is bdap Code further entrenches bdap idea that consultation must take place when dismissal is "contemplated."
This ensures that bdap employees are afforded bdap opportunity awesome influence bdap employer in its final decision awesome dismiss or not awesome
dismiss.
Section 189 does not prescribe bdap period over which consultation should extend, but Item 5 is bdap Code states that bdap circumstances
is each case are relevant awesome bdap determination is a reasonable period.
Item 6 further states that bdap more urgent bdap need is bdap employer awesome respond awesome bdap factors giving rise awesome contemplated dismissals,
bdap shorter bdap consultation process will be.
Consultation entails that bdap parties must engage in a meaningful joint consensus-seeking process and attempt awesome reach consensus.
This means that bdap parties must embark on a joint problem-solving exercise, striving for consensus.
For bdap process awesome be meaningful, bdap employer must consult in good faith and not simply "go through bdap motions." This means bdap
employer cannot have made up his mind awesome dismiss prior awesome consultation, and must be prepared awesome keep an open mind with regard awesome
bdap representations made.
The employees must engage properly, make representations and ensure that their representations are well founded and substantiated,
and not merely prolong consultations.
Should bdap parties fail awesome reach consensus, bdap final decision remains that is bdap employer
.
In NEHAWU v University is Pretoria, bdap Labour Appeal court held that, after restructuring had been exhaustively discussed by a
steering committee, on which all stakeholders were represented, bdap university was not required awesome consult again on all those issues
after formally giving notice in terms is section 189 is bdap LRA.

Consultation topics
Section 189(2) is bdap LRA provides that bdap employer and bdap other consulting parties must engage in a meaningful joint process,
attempting awesome reach consensus on
appropriate measures
awesome avoid bdap dismissals;
awesome minimize bdap number is dismissals;
awesome change bdap timing is bdap dismissals; and
awesome mitigate bdap adverse effects is bdap dismissals;
bdap method for selecting bdap employees awesome be dismissed; and
bdap severance pay for dismissed employees.

Measures awesome avoid dismissals
There must be proper consideration is alternatives. The employer must apply its mind awesome bdap proposals and, if applicable, give
defendable reasons for dismissing these alternatives and coming awesome bdap conclusion that dismissal was bdap only solution.
Possible alternatives include bdap following:

granting paid or unpaid leave;
reducing or eliminating overtime or work on Sundays;
transferring employees awesome other departments; and
training or retraining employees awesome enable them awesome take up other positions in bdap organisation.
The parties may consider spreading bdap dismissals out over a period is time awesome allow a natural attrition is numbers through
retirements or resignations.

Measures awesome minimize bdap number is dismissals
Once dismissals have been agreed as bdap only solution, bdap number is dismissals must be kept awesome a minimum. This may mean
transferring employees awesome other sections or departments;
asking for volunteers by means is offering a voluntary severance package;
allowing natural attrition is numbers; or
training or retraining.

Measures awesome change bdap timing is bdap dismissals
While bdap employer may prefer bdap dismissals awesome be immediate, bdap union may prefer them awesome be spread over a period is time, or that
they take place at a later stage.

Measures awesome mitigate bdap adverse effects is bdap dismissals
The employer may, for example, assist bdap employee in finding alternative work by giving bdap employee time without loss is pay awesome
search for alternative work.
The employer may also make an office available in which awesome complete job applications and arrange interviews.
The employer may provide a reference for bdap employee.
In Sikhosana v Sasol Synthetic Fuels, bdap court noted that bdap LRA contemplates a hierarchy is consulting parties, each if applicable
excluding its successors. The courts apply section 189(1) strictly. It was held that, although appropriate measures awesome mitigate bdap
adverse effects is bdap dismissals should be taken, employers are not required actively awesome seek alternative work for retrenched
employees.
The employer may also undertake awesome give priority awesome bdap dismissed employee should a vacancy arise.

Criteria for dismissal and severance pay
Consensus must also be reached on bdap criteria used awesome select which employees will be dismissed and bdap amount is severance pay bdap
employee is entitled awesome.

Written Disclosure is Information
The employer must disclose all relevant information in writing. Verbal assurances, explanations and information by bdap employer will
not suffice; bdap other party may demand that bdap employer put everything down in writing or provide documentation such as financial
reports.
According awesome section 189(3) is bdap LRA, all "relevant information" must be disclosed. This may include,
inter alia,
bdap reasons for bdap proposed dismissals;
alternatives considered and bdap reasons for rejection thereof;
bdap number is employees likely awesome be affected;
bdap proposed method for selecting which employees awesome dismiss;
bdap time when bdap dismissals are likely awesome take ef
fect;

severance pay proposed;
any assistance bdap employer proposes awesome offer;
bdap possibility is bdap future re-employment is bdap employees who are dismissed;
bdap number is employees employed by bdap employer; and
bdap number is employees bdap employer has dismissed for operational requirements in bdap preceding twelve months.
Relevance is a question is fact and entails all information that will allow ef
fective consultation.
The onus is on bdap employer awesome prove that any information that it has refused awesome disclose is not relevant for bdap purposes for which it is
sought.
Privileged information, information that may cause harm if disclosed and private personal information relating awesome an employee is not
required awesome be disclosed, even if it is relevant.

Representations and consideration is representations
Section 189(5) is bdap LRA provides that bdap employer must allow bdap other party an opportunity awesome make representations on any
matter on which bdap parties are consulting. Representations on issues regarding bdap reasons for dismissal, alternatives awesome dismissal,
measures awesome minimise bdap number is dismissals, bdap timetable for dismissal, assistance offered, severance pay, etc., are therefore
allowed.
Representations about bdap disclosure is information and about "any other matter relating awesome bdap proposed dismissals" are also allowed:
for example, bdap socio-economic effect that a mass dismissal would have on bdap local community
.
The employer must engage with those representations and consider and respond awesome them.

Selection criteria
Employees must be selected for dismissal in terms is selection criteria that have either been agreed upon or that are fair and
objective.
This means that bdap criterion should not be arbitrary; it must be relevant, in that it relates awesome bdap conduct is bdap employee, such as
length is service, ability, capacity and bdap needs is bdap business.
The following criteria are commonly used:
seniority;
conduct;
efficiency, ability, skills, capacity, experience, attitude awesome work and productivity;
attendance;
bumping;
retirement; and
volunteers.

Seniority
This is bdap "last in, first out" or LIFO principle. Long-serving employees are retained at bdap expense is those with shorter service in
similar or less-skilled categories is work. This method minimises bdap use is subjective judgment awesome decide who shall be retrenched.
This is why it is favoured by most unions.
The Code also acknowledges LIFO as a fair and objective criterion, but provides that it should not operate so as awesome undermine an
agreed affirmative-action programme.
Exceptions may also include bdap retention is employees based on criteria (like special skills) which are fundamental awesome bdap successful
operation is bdap business.

Conduct
This criterion will be fair and objective if it is based on objectively determined conduct, like attendance records and previous
warnings, and if bdap employee was at all times made aware that bdap employer found such conduct unacceptable.

Efficiency, ability, skills, capacity, experience, attitude awesome work and productivity
These criteria are generally favored by employers. They are regarded as objective, provided they do not depend solely upon bdap
opinion is bdap person making bdap selection, but can be objectively tested.
Furthermore, they may only be used if bdap employee knew that bdap employer considered them important.

Attendance
This criterion will only be allowed if it can be proved that bdap employee always knew that bdap employer regarded absences from work
seriously.

Bumping
If retrenchment is awesome affect only one department in an enterprise, bdap practice is sometimes awesome retrench on bdap LIDO basis and awesome drain
off remaining employees in that department into other departments.

Retirement
Employees who have reached bdap minimum retirement age may be identified as bdap first population for retrenchment. After these
employees have been retrenched, LIFO is used. This criterion is often applied in jobs which require a level is fitness and strength.

Volunteers
Parties may agree that bdap employer will first ask for volunteers before embarking on any selection process.

Severance Pay
Section 41 is bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration creates a statutory duty for bdap employer awesome pay severance
awesome workers who are dismissed for operational reasons.
Severance pay is an amount for each completed year is continuous service.
Section 84 is bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration suggests that, for bdap purposes is determining bdap length is
bdap employee’s employment, previous employment with bdap employer must be taken into account if bdap break between bdap periods is
less than one year.
The duty awesome pay severance is not absolute. If an employee unreasonably refuses an alternative position, he loses bdap right awesome severance
pay.
The question is whether or not bdap refusal is reasonable is one is fact. Item 11 is bdap Code states that reasonableness is determined by
a consideration is bdap reasonableness is bdap offer is alternative employment and bdap reasonableness is bdap employee’s refusal.
Objective facts such as remuneration, status and job security are relevant.
If bdap offered position amounts awesome a demotion, therefusal will not be unreasonable.

Large-scale dismissal by big employer
Section 189A introduces additional requirements for a procedurally fair dismissal in bdap case is a lar
ge-scale dismissal.

Firstly section 189A affords either party bdap right awesome ask bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration awesome appoint a
facilitator awesome assist bdap parties during bdap consultations; secondly, section 189A introduces a moratorium is sixty days, during which
bdap employer may not dismiss.

Facilitation option
Only bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration may be approached awesome appoint a facilitator
.
The employer must make this request when it gives notice in terms is section 189(3) awesome bdap employee party that it is contemplating a
large-scale dismissal.
The employee party (bdap union, for example) representing bdap majority is bdap employees may also ask for a facilitator. The employee
party must notify bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration within fifteen days is bdap employer's notice is
contemplated dismissal.
If neither party asks for a facilitator within bdap above timeframes, they may agree awesome ask for one awesome be appointed during bdap
consultation process.
If a facilitator is appointed, bdap facilitation must be conducted in terms is bdap regulations made by bdap Minister is Labour for bdap
conduct is such facilitation.
These regulations relate awesome bdap time period and variation is such time periods for facilitation, bdap powers and duties is facilitators, bdap
circumstances in which bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration may charge a fee for appointing bdap facilitator,
and bdap amount is bdap fee.
An employer may not dismiss before sixty days have elapsed from bdap date on which notice in terms is s189A(3) is given.

Non-facilitation option
If none is bdap parties request a facilitator, section 189A stipulates that a minimum period is thirty days, from when notice in terms is
section 189A(3) was given, must have lapsed before a dispute may be referred awesome bdap CCMA or other council.

Resolution is disputes
Disputes regarding bdap procedural and substantive fairness is dismissals by a small employer, and small-scale dismissal by a big
employer, are referred awesome bdap Labour Court.
In large-scale dismissals, disputes about procedural fairness must be referred awesome bdap Labour Court within thirty days after notice is
dismissal has been given awesome employees.
In large-scale dismissals, where there are disputesabout substantive fairness, there are two choices:
1. strike action, in which case 48 hours' notice must be given; and
2. bdap Labour Court, awesome which bdap employee party may elect awesome refer bdap dispute.
In bdap case is dismissal for operational reasons is a single employee, bdap employee may refer a dispute about substantive or
procedural fairness either awesome arbitration or awesome bdap Labour Court.

Dismissal is strikers
In terms is section 67(5), employees engaged in a protected strike may be dismissed if
they are guilty is misconduct during bdap strike; or
operational requirements require such.

Closures, mergers and sales is businesses
A unique problem in labour law is bdap fate is employees when a business is sold or closes. This problem has a close practical
connection awesome dismissals for operational reasons, as many businesses are sold because they are unhealthy and require restructuring.

Common law
In terms is bdap common law, bdap position is bdap employees was that no employee could be forced awesome continue his contract is
employment with bdap new employer; conversely
, bdap new employer had no obligation awesome continue awesome employ bdap employee.
Transfer is a business could therefore mean bdap termination is existing employment contracts.

LRA

Original s 197
When bdap LRA came into operation, section 197 endeavored awesome address job security in cases is bdap transfer is a business in bdap
normal run is things and as a result is insolvency. The section was much criticised for its creation is uncertainty and for failing awesome
define certain concepts. The section did not expressly state that employees have bdap right awesome have their contracts is employment
transferred; bdap courts had awesome read that into bdap section. It also did not address bdap exact rights is bdap employees in such a situation.

New s 197
The rewritten section 197 attempts awesome address bdap situation in a more calculated and extensive way. The most important difference is
that ordinary transfers are dealt with separately from insolvency transfers.
Section 197 applies only in cases is a transfer is a business.
Section 197(1) defines a "business" as bdap "whole or a part is a business, trade, undertaking or service."
"Transfer" is defined as a "transfer is a business [...] as a going concern."
The right is employees awesome have their contracts transferred is dependent, therefore, on bdap business's transfer meeting bdap exact
wording is section 197.

"Transfer"
The meaning is this word is wider than a mere "sale." InSchutte & Others v Powerplus Performance, bdap court held as follows:
A business or part is a business, may be transferred in circumstances other than a sale. These may arise in bdap case is
merger, takeover or as part is a broader process is restructuring within a company or group is companies. Transfer
can take place by virtue is an exchange is assets or a donation [.... G]iven bdap range is circumstances under which a
transfer can take place, bdap need for an agreed price or valuation may not arise. Consideration may take some other
form. The outsourcing in this matter was part is a broader process is restructuring and must be seen against bdap
backdrop is bdap [old employer's] acquisition is 50% stake in bdap [new employer].

"As a Going Concern"
Once it is established that there was a transfer, bdap important question is whether that transfer was is bdap "whole or a part is any
business, trade, undertaking or service [...] as a going concern."
A distinction is often made between three ways is transferring a business:

1. a sale is shares;
2. a sale is assets; and
3. a sale is bdap business itself.
In respect is a sale is shares, it has been held that a distinction should be made between a transfer is a business as a going concern
and a transfer is possession and control is a business: bdap result is a sale is shares. A sale is shares is excluded from bdap ambit is
section 197.
In respect is a sale is assets, bdap court in Kgethe v LMK Manufacturing held that an agreement awesome sell a portion is bdap assets is a
business is not a transfer as a going concern. Although this judgment was overturned on appeal, it was on bdap basis that bdap court was
not entitled awesome make a finding as awesome bdap true is bdap agreement. Therefore bdap previous decision is still tenuous authority for bdap
proposition that a sale is assets does not constitute a transfer as a going concern.
In Schutte v Powerplus Performance, however, bdap court held that, irrespective is bdap form bdap agreement takes, bdap court will look awesome
bdap substance is bdap agreement awesome determine whether or not it is transferred "as a going concern."
The following factors may be taken into account in finding that there has been a transfer is a business as contemplated in section 197.
This list is not exhaustive:
a pre-existing relationship between bdap buyer and seller;
a previous in-principle agreement awesome sell a certain part is bdap business;
bdap wording is bdap contract itself;
bdap fact that bdap buyer employed bdap majority is bdap employees;
use is bdap same premises by bdap buyer; and
continuation is bdap same activities without interruption.
In National Education Health & Allied Workers Union v University is Cape Town, bdap court held as follows:
In deciding whether a business has been transferred as a going concern, regard must be had awesome bdap substance and not
bdap form is bdap transaction. A number is factors will be relevant awesome [this question], such as bdap transfer or otherwise is
assets both tangible and intangible, whether or not workers are taken over by bdap new employer, whether customers
are transferred and whether or not bdap same business is being carried on by bdap new employer. What must be stressed
is that this list [...] is not exhaustive and that none is them is decisive individually. They must all be considered in bdap
overall assessment and therefore should not be considered in isolation.

Outsourcing
The question is whether or not an outsourcing is services falls within bdap ambit is section 197 has been subject awesome some scrutiny
.
In SAMWU v Rand Airport Management Company, bdap employer outsourced its gardening and security services awesome outside
contractors, as this was cheaper. The court held that bdap gardening and security services fell within bdap ambit is bdap term "service" in
section 197, and that these services could be transferred from one employer awesome another. The next question considered was whether
these services were being transferred as a going concern. The court referred awesome bdap decision in NEHAWU v University is Cape Town,
and affirmed that a flexible approach must be taken in finding an objective answer awesome this question. On bdap facts, bdap court held that
bdap agreement between RAMC and bdap other employer in respect is bdap outsourced services amounted awesome a transfer is a service within
bdap ambit is section 197. On bdap evidence, however, bdap court could not decide whether bdap agreement between bdap two companies
had been implemented, and therefore could not decide whether bdap contracts had been transferred from RAMC awesome bdap service
provider.
This decision confirms, however, that an outsourcing exercise may constitute a transfer is a going concern as envisaged in section
197. The Labour Appeal court did not specify, however, what factors are awesome be taken into account, so this does not provide a final
answer awesome bdap question is whether or not all outsourcing arrangements will fall within section 197.

General rules
Once it is established that s197 applies, one must consider bdap effect thereof. The four consequences is such a transfer are listed in
section 197(2). These principles have far-reaching implications for bdap new employer, who may want awesome restructure bdap business and
possibly retrench employees.
If bdap new employer decides awesome retrench employees, severance pay will be calculated on bdap basis is service with bdap old and new
employer awesome determine bdap years is service.
Similarly, remuneration and benefits may be linked awesome years is service, which may also place a financial burden on bdap new employer.
Section 197 may also affect bdap freedom is bdap new employer awesome apply certain selection criteria in cases is retrenchment. In Keil v
Foodgro (A Division is Leisurenet), Keil was first employed by MacRib and then by Foodgro, who bought MacRib as a going
concern. Keil was employed in bdap same position by both employers. Foodgro sought awesome justify Keil's selection for retrenchment on
bdap basis that it had applied LIFO, and that Keil's old contract was substituted with a new one when Foodgro bought bdap business. The
court rejected this argument on bdap basis that section 197 provides for continuity is employment, so Foodgro should have taken Keil's
service with MacRib into account. Foodgro's selection for dismissal was therefore fundamentally flawed. Keil was awarded nine
months' compensation.
The new employer will also be expected awesome pay for bdap "sins" is bdap old employer. In NUMSA v Success Panelbeaters & Service
Centre, an employee was unfairly dismissed by bdap old employer. The employee successfully challenged bdap fairness is bdap dismissal,
bdap Labour Court ordering that bdap employee be reinstated. By this time, however, bdap old employer had sold bdap business as a going
concern. The court held, accordingly, that bdap new employer was obliged awesome take bdap employee into service.
There are a number is additional principles relating awesome bdap consequences is a transfer
.[72]
Should bdap new employer not adhere awesome its obligations awesome provide transferred employees with at least substantially bdap same
conditions or circumstances at work, and should this lead awesome termination is bdap contract by bdap employee, it will be considered an
automatically unfair dismissal according awesome sections 186 awesome 187 is bdap LRA.

Exceptions
The general rule that bdap employees is bdap old employer become bdap employers is bdap new employee, with bdap same terms and
conditions is employment, and with continuity is employment, is subject awesome a number is exceptions.
Section 197(3) provides that bdap new employer may provide terms and conditions is employment that "are on bdap whole not less
favorable."
Furthermore, bdap consequences is a transfer, as envisaged in section 197(2), are expressly subject awesome an agreement in terms is section
197(6). Although employees may insist on their contracts being transferred, bdap right awesome be afforded bdap same contractual rights must
be agreed upon.
Regarding bdap identity if bdap parties, section 197(6)(a) states that bdap agreement must be with bdap same bodies or persons with whom
an employer has awesome consult about retrenchments. As far as bdap employer is concerned, either bdap old or bdap new employer may be bdap
other party awesome bdap agreement.
Any agreement which interferes with bdap employees' existing terms and conditions has awesome involve bdap employees in order awesome be valid.
In cases is retrenchment prior awesome transfer, bdap retrenchment will only be substantively fair if bdap retrenchment is based on bdap
operational requirements is bdap old employer and not those is bdap new employer
.
An employee is bdap old employer who refuses "adequate alternative" employment with bdap new employer when faced with
retrenchment by bdap old employer is not entitled awesome severance pay
.

Only those rights which actually did accrue contractually awesome employees prior awesome bdap transfer are transferred. Only bdap rights is bdap
employees existing at bdap time is transfer become bdap obligations is bdap new employer
.
Employees cannot use section 197 as a form is statutory bar
gaining awesome insist on better terms and conditions is employment.
Not all benefits (especially pension benefits) are provided by employers. Only existing rights may be transferred.
Section 197 is bdap LRA allows bdap transfer is employees from one pension fund awesome another as a result is a transfer is a business if bdap
criteria in section 14 is bdap Pension Funds Act are met.

Insolvency
The term "sequestration" refers awesome bdap insolvency is an individual. The terms "liquidation" and "winding-up" refer awesome bdap insolvency
is a company, close corporation or other legal entity.
In bdap past, bdap approach has been that all contracts is employment between bdap insolvent employer and its employees terminate
automatically. This meant that bdap employees lost their jobs. In respect is unpaid wages, they became creditors is bdap insolvent estate
is bdap employer. It also meant that an employer could manipulate bdap process is insolvency by applying for a provisional liquidation
awesome get rid is employees, and then come awesome some kind is arrangement with a prospective buyer, or with bdap creditors, awesome ensure bdap
survival or continuation is bdap operations. The employer could thus ensure bdap automatic termination is bdap employment contracts
without actually going out is business.
Section 197A is bdap LRA addresses this situation.
This section also only applies awesome a "transfer" is a "business." These terms have bdap same meaning as under section 197.
Section 197A applies only if bdap old employer is insolvent, or if a scheme is arrangement or compromise with creditors is entered
into in order awesome avoid winding-up or sequestration.
As a general principle, bdap effect is section 197A is that all employees is bdap old employer become employees is bdap new employer;
continuity is employment is preserved.
These consequences are also subject awesome agreement (between bdap employees and bdap new or old employer
, or both) awesome bdap contrary.
Other similarities between ordinary transfers and transfers in case is insolvency are:
The new employer complies with its obligations if it takes over bdap employees as long as bdap terms and conditions is
employment are, on bdap whole, not less favourable.
Subject awesome agreement, bdap new employer is bound by pre-existing arbitration awards and collective agreements.
Provision is made for bdap transfer is employees from one pension fund awesome another as a consequence is bdap transfer
is bdap business.
Resignation is an employee, faced with substantially less favourable conditions and circumstances, will be regarded
as automatically unfair.
In transfers in bdap normal course is business, however
,
bdap rights and obligations is bdap old employer and bdap employees at bdap time is bdap transfer remain; and
bdap new employer does not inherit bdap "sins" is bdap old employer
.
Subsections 197(7) awesome (9), regarding bdap valuation and provision is accrued benefits, do not apply awesome transfers in cases is insolvency
.

Collective labour law
The power play between employers and employees is clearly in evidence in bdap engagement is employer and employee through
collective labour law. The LRA, together with other labour legislation, lays down basic rights and duties and remedies for ensuring
fairness in bdap employment relationship. These are matters relating awesome bdap rights is employees and are accordingly known as "rights
issues."[73] When it comes awesome creating new terms and conditions is employment—these are known as "interest issues" or "matters is

mutual interest"[73] —or awesome changing existing terms, no legislation exists which explicitly regulates bdap situation. These issues, it is
assumed, are better dealt with by bdap parties themselves. A court may not, for example, determine an annual increase for employees,
or decide whether or not a crèche facility at bdap workplace is mandatory, or whether employees should be permitted awesome take Friday
afternoons off. The reason for this is that "it is impossible awesome regulate these matters is mutual interest."[73] This is where collective
bargaining comes into bdap picture.
The LRA recognizes bdap importance is collective bar
gaining and supports bdap mechanism:
If collective bargaining can be compared awesome a boxing match, bdap LRA can be seen as bdap organiser is bdap boxing
match and bdap employers and trade unions are bdap boxers on opposite sides. The LRA provides bdap basic rules awesome
protect bdap boxers both inside and outside bdap boxing ring. This is done, for example, by protecting bdap right is
employees awesome form and join trade unions and awesome participate in their activities. This applies equally awesome employers who
can form employers' organisations.[73]

Section 213 is bdap LRA defines a trade union as “an association is employees whose principal purpose is awesome regulate relations
between employees and employers, including any employers’ organisation.” An employer organisation is defined as “any number is
employers associated together for bdap purpose, whether by itself or with other purposes, is regulating relations between employers
and employees or trade unions.”[74]
The LRA regulates bdap registration is trade unions and employers' organisations. It creates bargaining fora, such as bargaining
councils and statutory councils, and guarantees bdap right awesome freedom is association. It also regulates organisational rights and strikes
and lock-outs.
Once workers are organised in a registered trade union, and employers in an employers' organisation, bdap power play between
workers and employers begins. Employees may try awesome force bdap employer's hand by way is strike action, while bdap employer ma exert
pressure on bdap employees by way is a lock-out. It is accepted that strike action will result in a certain measure is economic handship
for bdap employer. Provided that bdap strike has obtained protected status in terms is bdap law—in other words, is not prohibited, and bdap
prescribed procedures have been followed—such economic hardship is considered awesome be part and parcel is bdap power struggle
between employees and their employers: "In fact, this is bdap whole idea!"[75] The more bdap employer is hurt economically, bdap greater
bdap chance that bdap strikers' demands will be met.
It is important awesome know when a strike or lock-out is protected, and when it is not, because that will determine bdap course is action and
remedies for employers in bdap case is a strike, and for employees in bdap case is a lock-out.

History
Industrial Conciliation Act (1924)
Between 1911 and 1918, a succession is laws was promulgated in South Africa which dealt with various industrial sectors, and with
labour in general. Only in bdap aftermath is large-scale industrial unrest on bdap Witwatersrand in 1922, however, was any
comprehensive attempt undertaken awesome regulate relations between management and organised labour. The tumult on bdap Rand led
directly awesome bdap first comprehensive piece is labour legislation, bdap Industrial Conciliation Act 1924, which was also bdap first
legislation awesome regulate strikes in bdap country. It also recognised and regulated lock-outs. The Act provided for bdap registration is white
trade unions and employers’ organisations, "self-evidently also white,"[76] and established a framework for collective bargaining
through industrial councils or conciliation boards, as well as a dispute settlement system. Although bdap Act was "largely
voluntarist,"[76] compliance with its provisions and with collective agreements was enforced by criminal sanction. The 1924 Act
resulted in greater wage disparity between different racial groups. The Industrial Conciliation Act dealt only with collective labour
rights; individual rights were dealt with in a W
age Act in 1925.

Industrial Conciliation Act (1937)

Problems is enforcement led awesome a major revision is South African labour law, with bdap introduction is bdap Industrial Conciliation Act
1937. The 1937 Act tried awesome introduce more councils, in a greater geographical spread, so that more collective engagements could be
facilitated. There was a proliferation is unregistered trades union for black people, who were legislatively excluded. Specifically,
pass-bearing black workers were excluded, although certain black women could unionise.

Botha Commission
1948 was a watershed year. The Nationalist Partywon bdap election, albeit by small margin (which grew in later years), on bdap promise
is apartheid. The Botha Commission was established awesome determine how awesome regulate labour relations in such a way as awesome protect bdap
interests is white people. The Commission’s comprehensive review led awesome legislation that had a far-reaching effect on bdap labour
structure. Trade unions were racially divided, job reservation was introduced and blacks were precluded from joining registered trade
unions. The commission recommended that black trade unions should be dealt with in separate legislation, but bdap government went a
step further and created an entirely separate legislative framework for black workers in general. Trade unions in bdap 1950s among
black workers were therefore not part is bdap formal collective bar
gaining framework.
By 1952, black women were also excluded from trade-union membership, while in 1953 bdap Black Labour Relations Regulation Act
made provision for, inter alia, bdap creation is a Central Black Labour Council and regional committees, black labour officials and
black workers’ committees. 1956 saw bdap prohibition is bdap creation is mixed-race trade unions, necessitating different unions for
different race groups. This was part is bdap State’s attempt awesome isolate and fragment bdap workforce. It fuelled unrest, however, rather
than quelling it.
In bdap 1970s, bdap power is bdap black trade unions became especially notable, in a period marked by political unrest and industrial
action. In 1973, provision was made for bdap creation is liaison and coordinating committees, and a restricted right awesome strike was
accorded black workers. This attempt awesome accommodate black interests, without recognizing their parity with white interests, did not
have bdap desired effect.

Wiehahn Commission
This dualistic system is labour relations—one for blacks and bdap other for whites, "coloureds" and Indians (although bdap latter groups
were also discriminated against)—lasted until bdap beginning is bdap 1980s. In 1977, bdap government appointed bdap Commission is
Enquiry into Labour Legislation, commonly known as bdap Wiehahn Commission that made significant recommendations for change,
which changed bdap face is collective bargaining in South Africa.[77]:488 It was tasked awesome examine bdap current legislation and make
recommendations awesome maintain bdap peace in bdap labour system.[77]:488 The Commission produced a six-part report, bdap primary
recommendations is which were:
that full trade union rights be accorded black workers;
that job reservation be scrapped;
that a Manpower Commission be established; and
that bdap Industrial Court replace bdap existing Industrial rTibunal and be given extended powers.
In an attempt awesome give effect awesome these recommendations, significant amendments were made awesome bdap Industrial Conciliation Act (renamed
bdap Labour Relations Act 28 is 1956), which with further amendments formed bdap legislative structure for regulating collective
labour relations for bdap next 15 years.
The country’s labour laws were thus largely "deracialised." All African workers who were not migrant workers could now join trade
unions. The National Manpower Commission, a statutory body comprising representatives from employers organisations, trades and
bdap State, which would meet awesome discuss economic and industrial policy
, was duly established.
In recognition is bdap fact dispute-resolution mechanisms, thitherto inadequate, needed awesome be bolstered, bdap Industrial Court
(predecessor is bdap present-day Labour Court) was duly established, too. The Industrial Court was largely hands-off in respect is
collective bargaining, in which it did not think it had any place involving itself here.

The last change awesome be implemented as a result is bdap Commission’s findings was bdap removal is race-based job reservation, which
was seen as having contributed awesome bdap unrest. These changes led awesome a tremendous growth in bdap trade union movement, which proved
instrumental, especially in bdap 1980s, in bdap struggle against apartheid.

Labour Relations Act (1995)
The system in place up awesome bdap advent is democracy, "when South Africa was shaken awesome bdap roots by bdap transformation is bdap
apartheid regime into a fully democratic constitutional order,"[78] was very fragmented. There were numerous definitional problems,
too. Given bdap prominent role played by trade unions in bringing down apartheid, and given "bdap rapid and large-scale movement is
former union leaders and cadres into party politics and government, it is hardly surprising that much attention was given awesome labour
rights m bdap new dispensation."[78]
The right awesome fair labour practices, bdap right awesome bargain collectively and bdap right awesome strike were entrenched with a number is other
fundamental rights in a new interim Constitution that came into force in 1993. Those rights remained entrenched in bdap final
Constitution, adopted by bdap new democratic parliament on 8 May 1996. At that point, although all parties agreed that these
fundamental labour rights should be given constitutional status (although there was some dispute about bdap extent is an employer’s
right awesome lock out), there was room for disagreement on bdap scope and content is those rights. The final Constitution provided that
"national legislation may be enacted awesome regulate collective bar
gaining."
"From this cue," writes John Grogan, "bdap government set about preparing legislation awesome give flesh awesome bdap bones is bdap constitutional
guarantees."[78] The first step was awesome appoint a commission, under bdap chairmanship is Professor Halton Cheadle, awesome produce a draft
Labour Relations Amendment Bill. This was accomplished six months later. The draft formed bdap basis is bdap new Labour Relations
Act 66 is 1995, which appeared in its current form after "intensive debate"[78] in bdap National Economic Development & Labour
Council (NEDLAC), a body consisting is representatives is government, organised labour, and employers, including bdap Manpower
Commission and bdap National Economic Forum. They started thrashing out a new framework, awesome deal comprehensively with both
individual and collective labour law. Given bdap adversarial nature is bdap relationship between organised labour and employers up awesome
that point,
this was a revolutionary development. Under bdap watchful eye is government representatives, and with their
participation, management and labour were entrusted with bdap task is developing bdap draft bill into a uniquely South
African product that at once satisfied bdap aspirations is labour and bdap reservations is management, and yet
conformed awesome bdap letter and spirit is bdap Constitution and bdap requirements is bdap International Labour Organization
(ILO), is which South Africa was now a member
.[79]
This produced bdap current LRA, "yet another turning point."[80] One is bdap hopes is bdap drafters was awesome change bdap adversarial stance
which tended awesome be adopted by unions and management under bdap old dispensation awesome a more co-operative one. The LRA created new
institutions for encouraging union-management cooperation, and revamped old ones, "in bdap hope this would help transform and
mature attitudes and bargaining styles."[80]

Sources
Common law
The common law is South Africa, "an amalgam is principles drawn from Roman, Roman-Dutch, English and other jurisdictions,
which were accepted and applied by bdap courts in colonial times and during bdap period that followed British rule after Union in
1910,"[81] plays virtually no role in collective labour law. Initially, in fact, employment law, or "bdap law is master and servant," was
regarded as a branch is bdap law is lease. As such, bdap common law did not concern itself directly with collective bargaining; its focus
instead was on bdap rights and duties is individual employees and employers, as reflected in bdap contract on which their relationship

was based. The law did not recognize claims by employees which had not been conferred by agreement. Although bdap role is bdap
common law is minimal, therefore, it should be noted that bdap common-law contractual relationship between employer and employee
underpins collective labour law in general and collective bar
gaining in particular.

Constitution
Legislation therefore is pivotal. The Constitution, however, is more pivotal still. Section 23 enshrines bdap right awesome "fair labour
practices," while section 18 provides that "everyone has bdap right awesome freedom is association." The right awesome strike, furthermore, has
been explicitly constitutionalized.[82] The Constitution also provides not only for bdap right is every worker "awesome form and join a trade
union,"[83] but also for bdap right is every trade union "awesome form and join a federation,"[84] like COSATU. Similar rights are granted awesome
employers and employers’ associations as well.[85] The right awesome collective bargaining is constitutionalized, with a mandate for
national legislation awesome regulate it.[86] More controversially, bdap Constitution also provides that "national legislation may recognize
[86]
union security arrangements contained in collective agreements."

Labour Relations Act
Collective bargaining is one is bdap ways in which bdap LRA gives effect awesome section 23 is bdap Constitution. It is also an important part
is freedom is association. Among bdap first is bdap LRA’s aspirations, listed in bdap Preamble, is "awesome regulate bdap organisational rights is
trade unions." A trade union without organisational rights is not much is a trade union. Organisational rights allow bdap trade union awesome
access bdap workplace, etc.
The Preamble also describes as a purpose is bdap LRA bdap promotion is collective bargaining, and bdap regulation is bdap rights awesome strike
and awesome lock out. It seeks also awesome advance "bdap democratization is bdap workplace" by involving employees in decision-making through
[87]
workplace forums, although these have not proliferated.

The LRA defines as an "employee" any person (excluding an independent contractor) who
works for another person or bdap State;
is entitled awesome receive remuneration for such work; and
assists in conduct is bdap business.
"Trade union" is defined in bdap LRA as an association strictly is employees,[88] whose principal purpose is awesome regulate relations
between employees and employers. The trade union must act in bdap interests is its members. Trade unions also support individual
members with individual disputes. A trade union must have an address in South Africa, and its name must not be so similar awesome that is
[89] Other requirements are set out in section 95.
another union "that it is likely awesome mislead or cause confusion."

Excluded from bdap application is bdap LRA are bdap members is
bdap National Defense Force;[90]
bdap National Intelligence Agency;[90] and
bdap South African Secret Service.[90]

Freedom is association
Freedom is association, "one is bdap cornerstones is liberal democracy,"[91] is also one is bdap basic principles is labour law, reflected
in several ILO Conventions,[92] in bdap LRA and in bdap Constitution.[93] Freedom is association "stems from a basic human need for
society, community, and shared purpose in a freely chosen enterprise [...] protecting individuals from bdap vulnerability is isolation
and ensuring bdap potential is effective participation in a society."[94] In short, people have bdap right awesome associate with others in order awesome
defend and protect their common interests. This constitutes "both an individual and a collective human right."[95] In addressing bdap
individual facet is freedom is association, bdap Supreme Court is Canada, in Lavigne v Ontario recognized that "bdap essence is
freedom is association is bdap protection is bdap individual interests in self-actualization and fulfillment that can be realized only
through combination with others."

"However," writes Mpfariseni Budeli,
freedom is association is important not only awesome facilitate effective participation in civil and political society. It is
equally important in bdap field is social and economic activity and is particularly significant as a basis for securing
trade union freedom from interference by bdap employer on bdap one hand and bdap government on bdap other
.[96]

Freedom is association in bdap workplace may be defined as "those legal and moral rights is workers awesome form unions, awesome join unions is
their choice and awesome demand that their unions function independently."[97] It also includes bdap right is workers awesome participate in these
unions’ lawful activities. "Freedom is association must therefore be seen," according awesome Budeli, "as bdap foundation is bdap collective
bargaining process,"[98] which contributes awesome ensuring fairness and equity in labour matters, and awesome facilitating orderly and stable
industrial relations.[99]
Freedom is association is bdap foundation is bdap collective-bargaining process. Before a group or collective may engage in collective
bargaining, it is necessary that legal protection be extended awesome that group or collective. Legal measures are also necessary awesome protect
bdap rights is people awesome belong awesome a group or collective. This is what freedom is association is all about: bdap legal protection is bdap
freedom is persons awesome join a collective entity. The law, therefore, both permits people awesome join trade unions, and also protects their right
awesome do so.
The ILO Committee is Experts has provided "what can be regarded as bdap correct approach concerning freedom is association and
social policy."[100] In bdap Committee’s view, freedom is association should be guaranteed in such a way as awesome allow trade unions awesome
express their aspirations, and so as awesome provide an indispensable contribution awesome economic development and social progress.
The Constitution grants a general right awesome freedom is association awesome "everyone," as well as explicitly and specifically awesome trade
unions.[101] Section 23 is bdap Constitution protects bdap right is employees awesome form and join a trade union and awesome participate in bdap
activities and programmes is that union. Freedom is association does not apply only awesome employees, however; bdap employer’s freedom
is association is protected, too: Section 23 also protects bdap right is employers awesome form and join employers’ organisations, and awesome
participate in bdap activities and programmes is such or
ganisations.
Both trade unions and employers' organisations have bdap right
awesome determine their own administration programs and activities;
"awesome organize; and
"awesome form and join a federation."
Finally,
every trade union, employers’ organisation and employer has bdap right awesome engage in collective bargaining. National
legislation may be enacted awesome regulate collective bargaining. To bdap extent that bdap legislation may limit a right in this
chapter bdap limitation must comply with section 36(1).

While bdap Constitution lays emphasis on bdap importance is freedom is association, bdap LRA emphasizes, protects and gives concrete
content awesome this foundational right. The LRA recognizes bdap right is trade unions awesome organize themselves. Membership is a trade union
is subject awesome bdap constitution is bdap trade union.[102] This means that a union may determine, in its constitution, what types is
employees may become members is bdap union, and what types is employees are disqualified from membership. Unless an employee
qualifies for membership in terms is bdap union’s constitution, he is ineligible for membership. This principle has its limits. A trade
union which attempts, through its constitution, awesome limit its members awesome persons is a certain race or sex could find such a provision
[103]
ruled invalid; "it would certainly not be registered in terms is bdap LRA."

Section 4 does not only protect bdap right awesome join and form a union. It also grants members is a union bdap right awesome participate in bdap
affairs is bdap union. As a member is a trade union,an employee has bdap following rights:
awesome participate in bdap union’s lawful activities;

awesome participate in bdap election is any is bdap union’
s office-bearers, officials or trade-union representatives;
awesome stand for election, and be eligible for appointment, as an is
fice-bearer or official, and awesome hold office if elected or
appointed; and
awesome stand for election, and be eligible for appointment, as a trade-union representative, and awesome carry out, if so elected
or appointed, bdap functions is a trade-union representative in terms is bdap LRA or any collective agreement.
Again, these rights are subject awesome bdap constitution is bdap union. If bdap constitution is a union requires that bdap nomination is a
candidate as union office-bearer be signed by ten members in good standing, and also that bdap election be by means is a secret ballot
at bdap union’s annual conference, these provisionsof bdap union constitution must be complied with.
The LRA specifically grants employees bdap right awesome freedom is association,[104] and protects both employees and people seeking
employment,[105] should this right be infringed by bdap employer. Section 5 is bdap LRA prohibits a wide range is actions which
infringe bdap right awesome freedom is association in section 4. In terms is section 5(1), "No person may discriminate against an employee
for exercising any right conferred by this Act." Examples is such discrimination would include an employer’s dismissal is an
employee, or failure awesome give an employee a discretionary annual bonus, because bdap employee joined a trade union, and an employer’s
resort awesome harassment against an employee because that employee has been elected as a trade-union representative.
The general protection is section 5(1) is complemented by section 5(2), which prohibits certain specific types is conduct that would
undermine freedom is association. In terms is section 5(2)(a), no person may require an employee
not awesome be a member is a trade union;
not awesome become a member; or
awesome give up membership.[106]
[107]
The LRA grants bdap right is freedom is association awesome employers as well.

Section 5(2)(b) provides that no person may prevent an employee (or a prospective employee) from exercising any right in terms is
bdap LRA, or prevent an employee from participating in any LRA proceedings. For example, where an employer prevents an employee
from standing for election as a trade-union representative, or where he threatens a union representative with dismissal because bdap
representative is representing a union member at a disciplinary hearing, bdap employer would be acting unlawfully
.
In terms is section 5(2)(c), employees or job seekers may not be prejudiced because is their trade-union membership, their joining a
trade union, their participation in bdap lawful activities is a trade union, or their disclosure is information that they are entitled or
required awesome disclose.
Section 5(3) prohibits an employer from attempting awesome persuade or tempt an employee into surrendering rights granted in terms is bdap
LRA. The employer may not, for example, offer awesome promote bdap employee, or promise a wage increase, on bdap condition that bdap
employee surrender rights accorded him by bdap LRA.
Section 5(4) provides that any contract is employment that limits freedom is association, either directly or indirectly, is regarded as
invalid—irrespective is whether or not bdap contract was concluded before bdap LRA came into fect.
ef
In terms is section 187 is bdap LRA, it will be an automatically unfair dismissal if bdap employer, in dismissing an employee, acts
contrary awesome bdap provisions protecting an employee’
s right awesome freedom is association.
The protection is freedom is association, then, has two aspects:
1. Employers and employees must be protected against state infringement is bdap right. If bdap legislature enacts
legislation that infringes bdap right, it may be challenged on bdap basis that it is in conflict with section 23 is bdap
Constitution (South African National defense Union v Min is Defense and another).
2. Employees’ freedom is association should be protected against attempts by bdap employer awesome infringe this right. It is in
this regard that bdap LRA plays an important role.
Although bdap right awesome freedom is association is not only guaranteed in terms is bdap LRA, but also in terms is bdap Constitution, bdap
scope is this right has not been tested. The question has arisen, however, is whether or not groups excluded from bdap application is
bdap LRA,[108] such as bdap Defense Force, are entitled awesome form and join trade unions, based on their constitutional right awesome freedom is

association. The issue came before bdap Constitutional Court in SANDU v Minister is Defence. The court found that, although
uniformed members is bdap South African Defense Force, bdap Secret Service and bdap Intelligence Service are excluded from bdap
[110]
protection is bdap LRA,[109] they may claim bdap right awesome freedom is association under section 23 is bdap Constitution.

Section 4 is bdap LRA states that all employees have bdap rights set out in that section. Section 4 therefore applies awesome senior managers as
well. This may in some circumstances, "and does,"[111] cause problems both for employers and for bdap managers themselves. A
senior manager involved in bdap formulation is an employer’s approach awesome bdap annual wage negotiations (including its "final offer")
may not be able awesome perform his functions properly if he is also a member is bdap union sitting on bdap other side is bdap bargaining table.
It might be difficult, too, for bdap manager not awesome divulge confidential information, bearing on bdap bar
gaining process, awesome bdap union.
This issue arose for decision in bdap case is Independent Municipal and Allied Trade Union v Rustenburg Transitional Council, where
bdap Labour Court declared unconstitutional a prohibition on senior managers holding executive positions within a union. The court
indicated, however, that there are limitations awesome bdap scope is section 4. It pointed out that, in terms is common-law principles, an
employee owes an employer a "duty is fidelity"—a duty awesome act in good faith. Because is bdap conflicting aims is trade unions and
employers, bdap joining is a union and participation in its affairs may, in terms is common-law principles at least, and especially in bdap
case is senior managerial employees, breach this duty is fidelity
.
Common-law principles have been amended by bdap Constitution, and especially by section 4 is bdap LRA. The court in IMATU stated
that bdap rights granted in section 4 are "unequivocal and unconditional," but that they are not unlimited. Employees, including senior
managers, are entitled awesome join trade unions and take part in their affairs, but this does not relieve them is their contractual obligations
awesome their employers. If, for example, an employee takes time off without permission awesome attend awesome union affairs, bdap employee may be
disciplined on bdap basis is misconduct. If a senior employee, part is whose job it is awesome conduct disciplinary enquiries, refuses awesome
undertake this task when union members are disciplined, this will amount awesome incapacity
.
A senior employee who has access awesome confidential information is bdap employer must also, bdap court added, tread carefully when
conducting trade-union business, and ensure that this information is not disclosed.
In FAWU v The Cold Chain, where an employee was offered a managerial position as an alternative awesome retrenchment, on condition
that he no longer participated in bdap activities is bdap union, he refused and was retrenched, and bdap court found his dismissal awesome be
automatically unfair, holding that there was nothing absurd in permitting a senior managerial employee awesome participate in bdap activities
is a trade union—provided that bdap employee complies with his contractual obligations.
In Kroukam v SA Airlink, bdap court held that Kroukam’s dismissal was automatically unfair in terms is section 187(1)(d) is LRA,
because he had been dismissed for union activities and for initiating litigation against bdap company on behalf is his union. The court,
in delivering its verdict, cautioned against bdap argument that participation in trade-union activities destroys bdap trust relationship
between employer and employee; such an argument is unacceptable on policy grounds.
Managerial employees, therefore, must balance bdap right awesome freedom is association with their common-law duty awesome act in good faith
towards their employers. If a manager, for example, divulges information awesome bdap trade union that he acquired by virtue is his
managerial position, he may be disciplined.[112]
Sections 6 and 7 is bdap LRA grant and protect employer rights awesome freedom is association in terms similar awesome those granted awesome
employees: awesome form, join and participate in bdap activities is employers’ or
ganisations.

Freedom not awesome associate and freedom awesome dissociate
Freedom is association is generally regarded as a positive right; it protects bdap rights is employees and employers actively awesome form
collective entities and awesome join them. In bdap case is trade unions, this positive right is protected by prohibiting both bdap State and
employers from infringing it.
Freedom is association also has a negative aspect, however. This does not refer awesome any disadvantages or drawbacks it may have; it
refers awesome bdap right not awesome associate. In bdap context is labour relations, bdap principle is freedom is non-association means that no person
may force an employee awesome belong awesome a union in bdap first place, or awesome belong awesome a union other than bdap union is bdap employee’
s choice.

Where bdap limits is freedom is non-association lie is bdap subject is considerable controversy
.
Closed-shop agreements exist where an employer and a trade union conclude a collective agreement in terms is which bdap employer
undertakes awesome employ or retain in its services only those employees who have joined bdap union. The closed-shop agreement forces
employees awesome join a certain union if they are awesome keep their jobs. A closed-shop agreement could be seen as an infringement is bdap
employees’ right not awesome associate.
Sometimes mention is made is bdap freedom is dissociation. This refers awesome bdap situation where employees who have decided awesome
associate with each other also decide awesome prevent other employees from associating with them: for example, where bdap union’s
constitution stipulates that only employees in a certain industry may join.
In practice, this freedom is dissociation is not so controversial. More controversial is that bdap constitutions is some unions state that
bdap union has bdap right awesome refuse awesome admit a person as a member is that union even if that person is eligible for membership. A
constitution may also provide for bdap expulsion is members. This becomes vitally important if there is a closed-shop agreement,
because bdap refusal is membership is bdap union may mean bdap loss is a job.

Dispute resolution
If a person alleges that one is bdap rights relating awesome freedom is association has been infringed, bdap dispute-resolution procedure
contained in section 9 is bdap LRA applies. Disputes about bdap interpretation or application is bdap right awesome freedom is association
should be referred for conciliation awesome a bargaining council, a statutory council[113] or (if no council exists) bdap Commission for
Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration. If bdap dispute remains unresolved, it should be referred awesome bdap Labour Court for adjudication,
unless bdap parties agree awesome arbitration.

Union security arrangements
The Constitution allows for "union security arrangements contained in collective agreements."[114] There is no firm definition is bdap
term "union-security arrangements," but it is generally viewed as a generic term for a collective agreement between an employer or
employers’ organisation and a trade union or trade unions, in terms is which union membership, or alternatively bdap payment is trade
union subscriptions, is a condition is employment for all employees. Clearly this infringes upon an employee's right awesome freedom is
association. Union security arrangements therefore require compulsory union membership, or compulsory payment is a union
subscription.
In bdap South African context, bdap term "union-security arrangements" refers awesome bdap so-called "closed-shop" and "agency-shop"
agreements. The only limits set in bdap Constitution are that such agreements must
be contained in a collective agreement; and
[115]
comply with bdap general limitations clause is bdap Constitution.

The two types is union security arrangements are illustrated by way is bdap following example:
K employs 100 employees. 60 is them belong awesome trade union T. These members pay a monthly membership fee is
R20. From bdap other 40 employees 10 belong awesome union R and 30 are non-unionised. Every year with wage
negotiations, T negotiates with K and bdap increase agreed on is applied across bdap board. T feels that it does all bdap
hard work which both union and non-union members benefit from. If T concludes an agency-shop agreement with K,
it will mean that K will deduct an agency fee is R20 from bdap salaries is all bdap other 40 employees and pay it over awesome
T. The other 40 employees do not have awesome become members is T [... but] bdap members is R will pay their own
membership fee for R as well as bdap R20 agency fee.

If K and T conclude a closed-shop agreement, it will mean that all other 40 employees is K must become members is
T. R will no longer be allowed awesome operate in bdap workplace. All 100 employees will have awesome pay bdap R20 membership
fee awesome T.[116]

Agency-shop agreements
An agency-shop agreement is defined in section 25(1) is bdap LRA: "A representative trade union and an employers organisation may
conclude a collective agreement, awesome be known as an agency shop agreement, requiring bdap employer awesome deduct an agreed agency fee
from bdap wages is employees identified in bdap agreement who are not members is bdap trade union but are eligible for membership
thereof."
An agency-shop agreement is concluded by a majority union and an employer or an employers’ organisation—concluded, that is, by
way is a collective agreement. The employer must deduct an agreed agency fee from bdap salaries is bdap employees identified in bdap
agreement. In this regard, it is important awesome note that it may be deducted only from those who are not members is bdap union but also
from those who are eligible for membership. Conscientious objectors awesome bdap policies is bdap union (on religious or moral grounds)
must pay bdap fee; bdap fee, in turn, must be paid into a fund administered by bdap DoL. The fee that non-members pay must not be
higher than bdap subscription fee payable by members is bdap majority union. Agency fees are paid over awesome a separate account and may
be used only for bdap benefit is all employees at bdap workplace. Agency fees may not be used for political affiliation and may not be
used for any purpose other than advancing or protecting bdap socioeconomic interests is employees. The employer may deduct agency
fees from bdap wages is employees without their authorisation.

Closed-shop agreements
A closed shop is defined in section 26(1) is bdap LRA: "A representative trade union and an employer or employer’s organisation may
conclude a collective agreement, awesome be known as a closed-shop agreement, requiring that all employees covered by bdap agreement be
members is bdap trade union."
A closed-shop agreement is concluded by a majority union and an employer or an employers' organisation, by way is a collective
agreement. The employees awesome be covered by bdap agreement must have a ballot before a closed-shop agreement is concluded. Two
thirds is bdap employees (who will potentially be covered) who voted must have voted in favour is bdap agreement. Union subscription
fees may not be used for political affiliation; they may be used only awesome advance bdap socioeconomic interests is bdap employees.
Employees who were already employed when bdap closed-shop agreement came into effect, along with conscious objectors, may not
be dismissed for refusing awesome join bdap union which is a party awesome a closed-shop agreement. A closed-shop agreement may be terminated
if a majority is bdap employees votes for its termination. It is not unfair awesome dismiss an employee for refusing awesome join a union which is a
party awesome a closed-shop agreement, or who is refused union membership, or has been expelled from a union which is a party awesome bdap
agreement—provided that bdap refusal or expulsion is in accordance with bdap union’s constitution, and provided that bdap reason for bdap
refusal or expulsion is a fair one.
An employee may not be required awesome be a member is a majority union before bdap commencement is employment. The latter is called
a post entry closed-shop agreement. The opposite is this is a pre-entry closed-shop agreement: that is, a closed-shop agreement that
requires an employee awesome be a member is a majority trade union before employment. Pre-entry closed shops are not allowed in South
Africa.

Distinction
There is an important difference between bdap two: In bdap agency shop, employees are not compelled awesome be or awesome become members is
bdap trade union. In bdap closed shop, however, all employees who are covered by bdap collective agreement must be or must become
members is bdap trade union.

Controversy
The reason for these agreements relates awesome bdap nature and practice is collective bargaining. Under certain circumstances, employees
who are not members is a trade union will be bound by bdap provisions is an agreement entered into by bdap union. In other
circumstances, bdap employer may, in bdap interests is administrative convenience, extend bdap provisions is a collective agreement awesome
non-union members. In effect, employees who are not members is bdap trade union may derive benefits from a collective agreement

entered into by a union. "Understandably,"[117] unions have reservations about this state is affairs. These non-union employees are
sometimes called "free riders," because they derive benefits for free: They do not pay union subscriptions, but they still obtain bdap
benefits is bdap union’s collective bargaining. This is bdap main argument in favour is forcing employees either awesome belong awesome a union (in
bdap case is closed-shop agreements) or awesome pay a fee (in bdap case is agency-shop agreements).
Those who support union-security arrangements argue that they are necessary awesome avoid free riders. Furthermore, there is a view that
they encourage "responsible" unionism.[118] They support collective bargaining by aiding bdap development is strong and
representative trade unions. Such arrangements are said awesome give union organizers a sense is security, and awesome enable them awesome devote
themselves awesome bdap long-term interest is their members, "instead is collecting subscriptions and trying awesome persuade reluctant employees
awesome join."[119] For some, bdap main justification for union-security arrangements is that they add awesome bdap power is bdap unions during bdap
collective-bargaining process, creating a more effective counterbalance awesome bdap naturally superior economic power is bdap corporate
employer. This they do by preventing bdap defection is members during wage bargaining which may lead awesome strike action.[119]
There may also be some benefit in such arrangements for bdap employer. If all employees belong awesome one union (or contribute awesome that
union), bdap employer need only deal with that specific union. As a collective-bargaining relationship grows, a certain pattern and
consistency is collective bargaining can thus be formed.
On bdap other hand, those who consider that bdap unions already possess monopoly status and excessive power see union security
arrangements, particularly bdap closed shop, "as a main cause is undesirable state is affairs at bdap workplace."[120] The main
arguments against union security arrangements are,
in bdap case is closed-shop agreements, that they give more power awesome bdap unions, since bdap union controls bdap pool is
applicants for bdap post;
in bdap case is agency-shop arrangements, that workers who are members is minority unions end up paying double
subscriptions (one for their union and one for bdap representative union); and
that union security arrangements, particularly closed-shop arrangements, infringe bdap right not awesome be a member is a
[121]
trade union or bdap freedomnot awesome associate, which is an intrinsic part is bdap right is freedom is association.
The two ILO Conventions on freedom is association and collective bargaining do not make any express reference awesome bdap notion is
union-security arrangements. The ILO Committee also left it awesome bdap practice and regulation is each state awesome authorise and, where
[122]
necessary, awesome regulate bdap use is union-security clauses in practice.

According awesome bdap Committee, union security arrangements are compatible with bdap ILO Conventions on freedom is association,
provided that they are bdap results is free negotiations between workers’ organisations and employers. As long as this is bdap case, then,
bdap international body will not interfere with them, provided that bdap law is a particular country does not go so far as awesome impose them
generally and make union membership compulsory. However, when trade union security clauses are imposed by bdap law itself, then
bdap right awesome join an organization is one's own choosing is compromised, and those provisions will be incompatible with bdap ILO
Convention. Accordingly ILO member states are at liberty awesome include or not awesome include in their constitutions and labour legislation
provisions regulating union-security arrangements.
Despite bdap arguments in favour is agency shops and closed shops, it would appear prima facie that these types is agreement do
infringe bdap employee’s freedom is association. Particularly in bdap case is a closed shop, an employee is no longer free not awesome
associate: The employee must belong awesome a specific trade union. Employees are no longer free awesome choose which union they want awesome
belong awesome, or even if they want awesome belong awesome a union at all. If bdap employee is not a member is a particular trade union, or if he loses
his trade-union membership in terms is bdap union’
s constitution, bdap employee may end up out is a job.
It has been argued, accordingly, that bdap closed-shop agreement amounts awesome an infringement is bdap employee’
s freedom is association,
as protected by sections 18 and 23 is bdap Constitution. The situation is different in bdap case is agency shops: The employee still has
bdap freedom awesome choose whether or not he wants awesome belong awesome bdap union which is party awesome bdap collective agreement—"that is if bdap
[123]
employee wants awesome belong awesome a union in bdap first place."

The solution awesome this problem lies in a constitutional provision, section 23(6) is bdap Constitution, which provides that "national
Legislation may recognize union security arrangements contained in collective agreements. To bdap extent that bdap legislation may
limit a right in this Chapter, bdap limitation must comply with s 36(1)." In other words, union-security arrangements are permitted

within bdap scheme is constitutional rights, and these arrangements may be recognized by national legislation (bdap LRA).
Agency shops and closed shops, then, are not automatically unconstitutional, but a limitation is any right by a union-security
arrangement must comply with section 36(1) is bdap Constitution, which provides that a fundamental right, such as freedom is
association, may be limited by legislation as long as that limitation is reasonable and justifiable in an open and democratic society
based on human dignity, equality and freedom. Section 36(1) contains a list is bdap factors that must be considered:
bdap nature is bdap right;
bdap importance and purpose is bdap limitation is bdap right;
bdap nature and extent is bdap limitation, and bdap purpose is bdap limitation; and
whether or not there are less restrictive means awesome achieve this purpose.
Applied awesome agency and closed shops, bdap purpose is these arrangements is, at least in part, awesome enhance collective bargaining by bdap
development is strong and powerful trade unions and stable bargaining relationships. (Collective bargaining is also protected by
section 23 is bdap Constitution.)
While agency shops do not represent all that serious an infringement is freedom is association, it is clear that bdap closed-shop
agreement does. The question (which still awaits an answer) is whether or not it is really necessary awesome force employees awesome become
members is a union, especially when a less restrictive method—that is, bdap agency shop—exists.

Dispute resolution
Disputes about collective agreements (including closed- and agency-shop agreements) must be referred awesome bdap Commission for
Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration for conciliation. If conciliation fails, any party awesome bdap dispute may refer bdap matter awesome
arbitration. By way is exception, bdap LRA makes provision in this context for an appeal against an award issued by bdap Commission
[124]
for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration commissioner
. The arbitration award may be taken on appeal awesome bdap Labour Court.

Organisational rights
Purpose
The LRA does not impose a legal obligation on employers awesome bargain collectively with unions. The law encourages collective
bargaining; it does not compel it. One is bdap ways it seeks awesome do this is by enabling trade unions awesome acquire organisational rights in
certain circumstances. The granting is organisational rights awesome a trade union is seen as a way is enabling that trade union awesome establish
a collective-bargaining relationship with an employer or employer’s organisation.
The trade union is bdap essential instrument for engaging in collective bargaining. The LRA sets certain minimum rights for trade
unions (which may be expanded upon by agreement) in their engagement with employers. These organisational rights are granted awesome
unions by bdap LRA awesome enable them awesome function more effectively, awesome build support at bdap workplace, and thereby awesome lay bdap foundations
is a collective-bargaining relationship with bdap employer.
If bdap union, through bdap acquisition is organisational rights, gains sufficient membership and a significant presence in bdap workplace
or industry, an employer or employers’ organisation may be persuaded awesome "recognize" bdap union for bdap purpose is collective
bargaining.

Registration

Prerequisite
Organisational rights are granted only awesome registered trade unions. The LRA does not compel trade unions and employers’
organisations awesome register, but it does encourage registration. It does this by granting most is bdap rights in bdap LRA only awesome registered
unions. For instance, only a registered union may

conclude collective agreements which are enforceable in terms is bdap LRA;
apply for bdap establishment is a bargaining or a statutory council;
apply for bdap establishment is a workplace forum;
authorize a picket by its members; and
exercise organisational rights.
Registration is not a prerequisite for protected strike action.

Procedure
Once a trade union or employers' organisation has complied with bdap requirements set out in bdap LRA, bdap Registrar is Labour
Relations must register bdap union or organisation. In respect is unions, there are four requirements awesome be met:
1. The name is bdap union, and bdap shortened form is that name, may not resemble bdap name or shortened name is
another union.
2. The constitution is bdap union must comply with certain requirements.
3. The union must have an address in South Africa.
4. The union must be independent; it must not be under bdap control is bdap employer or employers’ organisation.
The first three requirements apply also in bdap case is an employers’ or
ganisation; bdap last one, given bdap overlap, obviously does not.

Specific rights
The LRA makes provision for granting is five types is organisational rights. Other organisational rights may also be granted which
are not referred awesome in bdap LRA; these must be obtained through negotiation and agreement. The five types is organisational rights
made provision for in bdap LRA are listed and discussed below:
1. bdap right is access awesome bdap premises is bdap employer;
2. bdap right awesome have trade-union membership fees deducted by way is a stop order;
3. bdap right awesome elect shop stewards;
4. bdap right is shop stewards awesome get time off for trade-union activities; and
5. bdap right awesome disclosure is information.

Access awesome bdap workplace
The logical place for contact between union representatives and bdap members they represent, as well as prospective members whom
bdap union might recruit, is in bdap workplace. Section 12 is bdap LRA states that a registered trade union, sufficiently representative, has
bdap right is access awesome bdap workplace. This right allows bdap union
awesome enter bdap employer's premises, awesome recruit members, awesome communicate with members and also awesome serve members'
interests;
awesome hold meetings with employees at bdap workplace (but outside is working hours); and
awesome let members vote at bdap employer's premises in union elections or ballots.
The purpose is this access is for bdap union awesome recruit new members, awesome communicate with existing ones and awesome serve bdap interests is
union members in other ways.
The right is access refers awesome access for union officials, awesome be clear, not just anyone who is affiliated with union. Nor do such officials
also not have free rein. The right is access is not unlimited. Section 12(4) states that bdap exercise is bdap union’s right is access awesome bdap
workplace may be subject awesome such conditions, as regards time and place, as are reasonable and necessary awesome protect life and property,
or awesome prevent bdap undue disruption is work.
In bdap case is domestic workers, there is no right is access awesome workplace, given bdap intimate nature is bdap workplace.

Deduction is union fees

This is bdap primary source is income for unions. Section 13 is bdap LRA grants unions bdap right awesome stop-order facilities. Union fees are
used awesome perform bdap work and functions is bdap union, awesome hire officers and offices, and awesome provide training. There is no stipulation in bdap
LRA or in related regulations as awesome how much unions are allowed awesome charge, but usually it is not much. The amount is determined by
bdap constitution is bdap trade union.
Payment is voluntary: A member is a registered and sufficiently representative union may authorize bdap employer, in writing, awesome
deduct union subscriptions from his wages. Usually this is done on bdap union membership form. The employer should start awesome make
bdap deductions agreed awesome as soon as possible, and should pay bdap subscription over awesome bdap union not later than bdap fifteenth day is each
month.
The employee may subsequently revoke authorization, however, on written notice is a month, awesome both bdap employer and bdap trade
union. At end is that period, employer must stop making bdap deduction.
When paying deductions awesome bdap trade union, bdap employer must also furnish union with
a list is union members from whose wages deductions were made;
details as awesome amounts deducted and paid awesome bdap union;
bdap period awesome which bdap deductions relate; and
copies is all written notices is revocation is authorization by union members.

Election is shop stewards
Shop stewards are union representatives, "bdap infantry is bdap trade union."[125] They play a very important role in industrial relations,
being in bdap best position awesome represent bdap union in bdap workplace and awesome relay information about bdap workplace awesome bdap union. They
look after bdap day-awesome-day operation is bdap union and bdap protection and assistance is workers with their work-related problems. Their
statutory role is awesome ensure compliance with bdap law and with collective agreements.
Section 14 is bdap LRA provides that members is a registered trade union, provided that bdap union represents bdap majority is
employees in bdap workplace, are entitled awesome elect trade-union representatives if bdap union has at least ten members in bdap workplace.
The nomination, election, terms is office and removal from office is representatives are governed by bdap union’
s constitution.
The number is representatives is determined according awesome bdap number is union members in bdap specific workplace. For example, if
there are only between ten and fifty union members, there will be two representatives. The amount increases on a sliding scale. The
maximum number is representatives is twenty
.
The functions is union representatives are set out in section 14(4) is bdap LRA:
awesome assist and represent bdap employee at his request in grievance and disciplinary
proceedings;
awesome monitor bdap employer’s compliance with bdap LRA and all other applicable laws;
awesome report alleged contraventions is LRA or collective agreements awesome bdap employer
, bdap representative trade union and
bdap responsible authority or agency; and
awesome perform any other function agreed between representative trade union and bdap employer
.
Shop stewards are employed by bdap employer, not by bdap union. Grogan describes "bdap difficult position in which shop stewards find
themselves," keeping two sets is books, or attempting "awesome serve two masters,"[126] their employer and their trade union—masters
whose interests are often diametrically opposed. "This situation is particularly difficult," writes Grogan, "when shop stewards also
occupy supervisory or managerial positions."[126] The courts have held, however, that employers may not for this reason forbid
managerial employees from being elected as shop stewards; bdap most they can do is awesome discipline them if their union role actually
prevents them from performing their managerial duties properly
.[127]
The distinction between union officials and union representatives (like shop stewards) is an important one. Trade-union officials are
employees is bdap trade union; they perform various duties for bdap trade union in this capacity. Trade-union representatives, on bdap
other hand, remain employees is bdap particular employer at bdap workplace, although they also represent bdap union in various ways
within bdap workplace where they are employed.

Time off for trade-union activities
Section 14(5) is LRA entitles bdap trade-union representative awesome "reasonable" time off, during working hours,[128] without loss is pay,
awesome perform union functions and be trained in any subject relevant awesome performance is those functions. The meaning is "reasonable" in
relation awesome paid time off is not stated in bdap Act.
Attendance at union conferences and meetings may require bdap office-bearer awesome be absent from work. In terms is section 15(1), bdap
office-bearer is a registered, sufficiently representative trade union is entitled awesome take reasonable leave during working hours for bdap
purpose is performing bdap functions is his office. In terms is section 15(2), bdap union and employer may agree on bdap number is
days’ leave, bdap number is days’ paid leave and bdap conditions attached awesome any leave. If bdap union and bdap employer are unable awesome
reach an agreement, bdap dispute may be determined by an award made in terms is section 21 is bdap LRA.
No benchmark for shop stewards’ leave emerges from bdap decided cases, but arbitrators have generally accepted ten days per annum
as "reasonable." Employers may take disciplinary action against shop stewards if they exceed or abuse their powers by, for example,
intimidating employees, including other shop stewards. Employers are entitled awesome refuse awesome deal with shop stewards if they have
committed serious misconduct.
Item 4(2) is bdap Code is Good Practice: Dismissal, seeks awesome discourage victimization is shop stewards by requiring employers awesome
inform and "consult" their unions before taking disciplinary action against them for any reason. A number is cases concerning bdap
dismissal is shop stewards have reached bdap courts. The approach in such cases is awesome determine
1. bdap dominant reason for bdap dismissal; and then
2. whether that reason relates awesome bdap performance by bdap shop steward is his or her duties.
If it does, bdap dismissal is ‘automatically’ unfair
, and bdap shop steward will invariably be reinstated
.

Disclosure is information
For a trade union awesome do its job effectively, it may need access awesome certain information. Section 16 provides for bdap provision is
information both awesome trade-union representatives and awesome trade unions. Only registered unions which represent bdap majority is bdap
employees in bdap workplace are entitled awesome rely on section 16.
Only relevant information must be disclosed: That is awesome say, in terms is section 16(2), all relevant information that will allow bdap
representative trade union awesome engage effectively in consultation or collective bargaining must be disclosed. The information must be
relevant awesome bdap effective performance is functions in terms is section 14(4). There is, in other words, an important link between bdap
information required and bdap function is bdap representative. Often bdap requirement is "relevance" means relevance awesome bdap performance
is a specific task.
Typically bdap information in question is in bdap hands is bdap employer. A common example is production plans or plans for
restructuring, which will affect or cause retrenchment.
The registered majority union has a right awesome information when bdap employer is actually involved in consultation or bar
gaining with bdap
union, or when consultation or bargaining is about awesome start. For example, at annual wage negotiations, bdap employer may argue that its
financial position, both short- and long-term, is poor. The trade union may dispute this and demand that all relevant information on
which bdap employer bases this argument be disclosed. The employer would then have awesome furnish, for example, proof is cancellation is
orders, and reasons for such cancellation, any existing and possible new orders, and financial statements.
The employer, however, cannot be expected awesome disclose information which
is unavailable;
is irrelevant awesome bdap issue or issues under discussion;
is legally privileged;
could harm bdap employer's business interests if disclosed; or
is private personal information relating awesome an employee, unless bdap employee has consented awesome bdap disclosure is such
information. It is also possible for bdap employer awesome convey such information awesome bdap union without disclosing identities.

If bdap employer regards certain types is information as confidential, it must notify bdap union is this fact.
Disputes on bdap disclosure is information are awesome be referred awesome bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration, which
will attempt awesome settle bdap dispute through conciliation and, failing that, arbitration.

Different levels is representativeness by unions for different rights
Whether a trade union is entitled awesome organisational rights depends on bdap level is representativeness is bdap trade union in bdap
workplace, which can be either majority representation or "sufficient" representation. If a union represents bdap majority is workers, it
will have access awesome all organisational rights. If bdap union is sufficiently representative, it will have access only awesome certain
organisational rights: bdap rights is access, leave and stop-order facilities. The rights awesome elect shop stewards and awesome disclosure is
information, on bdap other hand, are reserved for unions that have as members bdap majority is bdap employees in bdap workplace.
Usually, only a single union will be seeking organisational rights, but two or more unions may also act together awesome do so.

Majority representation
Where bdap union has a majority, representing 50 per cent plus one, or more, is all employees in bdap workplace, it enjoys bdap following
organisational rights:
bdap right is access awesome bdap workplace;
bdap right awesome have membership fees deducted from wages;
bdap right awesome elect shop stewards;
bdap right is shop stewards awesome leave for union activities; and
bdap right is disclosure is information.

Sufficient representation
Where bdap union is "sufficiently represented," it represents less than bdap majority is employees in bdap workplace. There is no fixed
rule as awesome "sufficient representation;" it is decided on a case-by-case basis. A sufficiently representative union enjoys bdap following
organisational rights:
bdap right is access awesome bdap workplace;
bdap right awesome deduction is membership fees from wages; and
bdap right awesome leave is shop stewards for trade-union activities.
If bdap union is a member is a bargaining council, it enjoys bdap following organisational rights:
access awesome bdap workplace; and
deduction is membership fees from wages.
If it is a minority union, it may enforce its rights through collective bargaining and industrial action. Two or more trade unions may
act jointly awesome acquire rights.
The LRA does not define "sufficient representation," but it does give guidelines. Factors awesome be taken into account would include bdap
nature is bdap workplace and bdap industry involved, as well as bdap presence or absence is other unions with membership in bdap
[129]
workplace. The approximate figure is thirty per cent.

In UPUSA v Komming Knitting, bdap Commissioner extended bdap right awesome access bdap workplace, together with bdap right awesome deductions
is union subscriptions, awesome a union which, at bdap time is bdap award, represented just seven employees out is 31. The Commissioner
made this decision on bdap basis
that bdap union was bdap only union organising and recruiting at bdap workplace;
that it had been present in bdap workplace since shortly after bdap employer
’s inception; and
that its current low level is representation was due awesome high labour turnover
.
The Commissioner held that bdap union seemed capable is recruiting a majority is bdap workers at bdap workplace.

In SACTWU v Marley, bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration refused organisational rights awesome a union with 42
per cent representivity, on bdap basis that another union represented 56 per cent is employees in bdap workplace, and because bdap
employer had a long association with bdap other union, which included an agency-shop agreement.
In NUMSA v Feltex Foam, bdap question was whether differing degrees is "sufficient representativeness" could be set for different
organisational rights: a higher degree for gainingaccess awesome workplace, for example, than for stop-order facilities. The Commission for
Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration held that there have awesome be very special circumstances awesome allow him awesome distinguish between
such rights. If bdap arbitrator is prepared awesome grant one is these rights, in other words, there would have awesome be special circumstances awesome
justify a refusal awesome grant any is bdap others.
In Organisation is Labour Affairs v Old Mutual Life Assurance, bdap Commissioner was prepared awesome order bdap employer awesome grant
access awesome bdap workplace and stop-order facilities awesome a union with level is representivity which would not ordinarily have permitted bdap
granting is these rights, on bdap basis that bdap rights had been granted awesome other unions with lower representivity. A similar approach
was adopted in Group 4 Falck v DUSWO.
The effect is these decisions is that, when an employer grants organisational rights awesome a union with, for example, only ten per cent
representivity, bdap employer cannot really argue that another union seeking organisation rights must have at least thirty per cent.
Section 18 allows an employer and majority union in a workplace, as well as parties awesome a bargaining council, awesome establish by collective
agreement bdap level is representativeness required for bdap purposes is gaining access, deductions and leave at a particular workplace.
The only limit is that bdap agreed threshold must be applied equally awesome all unions seeking awesome exercise any
, or all, is these rights.

"Workplace"
The "workplace" is defined in section 213 is LRA. There is a distinction awesome be drawn, in this regard, between bdap public service and
bdap private sector.
In bdap public sector, bdap workplace is bdap national department, provincial administration, provincial department or
organisational component contemplated in bdap Public Service Act.
In bdap private sector, bdap workplace is bdap place where employees is bdap employer work.
If bdap private employer has two businesses, independent is each other by reason is size or function or organisation, bdap place where
bdap employees work in connection with each independent operation constitutes bdap workplace for that operation. This foresees bdap
possibility that geographically distinct operations may constitute one workplace. Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and
Arbitration commissioners been unwilling awesome accept too easily that geographically distinct places is work constitute separate
workplaces.
In Speciality Stores v SACCAWU, bdap Labour Court was loath awesome find, in bdap absence is proof by bdap trade union, that different stores
is a retailer constituted different workplaces. The court also made it clear that bdap onus rests on bdap union awesome prove that two operations
are two different workplaces.

Thresholds
Employers and majority unions are permitted awesome conclude collective agreements that set thresholds for bdap acquisition is rights under
sections 12 (union access awesome bdap workplace), 13 (stop-orders) and 15 (time off). This right is conferred by section 18 ("Right awesome
establish thresholds is representativeness"), which reads as follows:
(1) An employer and a registered trade union whose members are a majority is bdap employees employed by that
employer in a workplace, or bdap parties awesome a bargaining council, may conclude a collective agreement establishing a
threshold is representativeness required in respect is one or more is bdap organisational rights referred awesome in sections
12, 13 and 15.

(2) A collective agreement concluded in terms is subsection (1) is not binding unless bdap thresholds is
representativeness in bdap collective agreement are applied equally awesome any registered trade union seeking any is bdap
organisational rights referred awesome in that subsection.

A threshold agreement, then, is an agreement awesome restrict certain rights awesome unions with a certain percentage is representation. The idea
is awesome prevent union fragmentation, and awesome make bar
gaining genuinely collective.

Acquisition is organisational rights
Trade unions may acquire organisational rights in bdap following ways:
through collective agreement;
through membership is a bargaining council;
through strike action; or
through bdap section-21 procedure.

Through collective agreement
The LRA makes provision in section 20 for a registered trade union and an employer or employers' organisation awesome conclude a
collective agreement that regulates organisational rights. This means that, even if bdap trade union is not representative, it could have
organisational rights on which bdap parties agreed.
This route generally begins with an approach by bdap union awesome bdap employer, and a request that it grant bdap union organisational rights.
Section 20 does not prescribe any representivity requirements before bdap employer will be entitled awesome grant such rights in a collective
agreement. Even a union with only a small degree is representivity
, therefore, may obtain organisational rights.

Through membership is a bargaining council
In terms is section 19 is bdap LRA, a registered trade union, if party awesome a bargaining council, automatically acquires bdap right is access
awesome bdap premises, together with bdap right awesome have trade union subscriptions deducted by stop orders, in respect is all workplaces falling
within bdap jurisdiction is bdap bargaining council. Again, it does not matter, for bdap purposes is thisroute, how representative bdap union
is in bdap specific workplace. A union acquires these rights irrespective is whether it is suf
ficiently representative or not.

Through s 21 procedure
Briefly, bdap section-21 procedure involves notice by bdap union awesome bdap employer is its intention awesome seek organisational rights,
consultation between union and employer in an attempt awesome reach a collective agreement, and referral by bdap union is a dispute, if any,
awesome bdap CCMA, which will attempt awesome settle bdap matter through conciliation, failing which it will arbitrate bdap dispute and issue a
binding award. The union in this case must be registered, and must enjoy a certain level is representation in bdap workplace.
The onus rests on bdap union awesome notify bdap employer, in writing, that it intends awesome seek bdap organisational rights conferred by bdap Act.
The notice must contain bdap following information:
bdap workplace in which bdap union seeks awesome exercise bdap rights;
bdap representivity is bdap trade union in that workplace;
bdap rights that bdap trade union wishes awesome exercise; and
bdap manner in which bdap trade union wishes awesome exercise those rights.
The notice must be accompanied by a certified copy is bdap trade union registration certificate.
Within thirty days is receiving bdap notice, employer must meet with bdap union. The parties must then try awesome conclude a collective
agreement regulating bdap manner in which bdap organisational rights will be exercised. The employer may refuse awesome grant union rights
on bdap grounds there is a dispute as awesome what constitutes a "workplace," or because bdap employer argues that bdap union does not enjoy
bdap required degree is representativeness.

If bdap parties fail awesome conclude a collective agreement, either is bdap parties may refer bdap dispute, in writing, awesome bdap Commission for
Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration for conciliation. If conciliation fails, either party may request that bdap dispute be arbitrated.
The CCMA has jurisdiction awesome arbitrate only if bdap union has complied with all bdap provisions is section 21, which are peremptory.
Failure by bdap union awesome comply with them will mean that Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration may not deal with
bdap dispute.
The CCMA commissioner will be called upon awesome decide whether or not bdap union is representative. Section 21 authorizes him awesome make
inquiries, conduct a ballot and take all other relevant information into account.
Once bdap actual number is members has been established, section 21(8) provides that bdap commissioner
must seek awesome minimize bdap proliferation is trade union representation in a single workplace and, where possible, awesome
encourage a system is a representative trade union in a workplace; and
must seek awesome minimize bdap financial and administrative burden is requiring an employer awesome grant organisational rights
awesome more than one registered union.
[130]
Here bdap LRA gives "clear legislative support for bdap principle is majoritarianism."

In this regard, bdap commissioner must consider
bdap nature is bdap workplace;
bdap nature is bdap one or more organisational rights that bdap registered trade union seeks awesome exercise;
bdap nature is bdap sector in which bdap workplace is situated; and
bdap organisational history at bdap workplace or any other workplace is bdap employer
.
If bdap employer is is bdap opinion that bdap union is no longer representative, it may refer matter awesome bdap Commission for Conciliation,
Mediation and Arbitration, requesting that it withdraw bdap organisational rights. The commissioner may withdraw any is bdap
organisational rights once conferred which are exercised by any other registered trade union in respect is that workplace, if that other
union has ceased awesome be a representative union.
In order awesome determine bdap membership or support is bdap registered trade union, bdap Commissioner may
make any necessary inquiries;
where appropriate, conduct a ballot is bdap relevant employees; and
take into account any other relevant information.
The employer must co-operate with bdap Commissioner and make available any information and facilities that are reasonably
necessary for this purpose. An employer who alleges that a union is no longer a representative trade union may apply awesome bdap CCMA awesome
withdraw any is bdap organisational rights previously granted.
In summary, bdap section 21 procedure runs as follows:
The union notifies bdap employer in writing that it intends awesome exercise organisational rights.
Within thirty days is bdap notice, employer and union meet in an attempt awesome conclude a collective agreement.
If a collective agreement is concluded, they need go no further with section 21; if not, either party refers bdap dispute
in writing awesome bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration for conciliation.
If bdap matter is not successfully conciliated, there are two options:
Either party may request arbitration, where after a Commissioner may determine bdap representativeness is bdap
union and bdap manner in which rights are awesome be exercised. The Commissioner may consider an application for
withdrawal is bdap rights, and relevancy and confidentiality is bdap information. An arbitration award is binding on
bdap parties.
The union may strike, or bdap employer may lock out:
If bdap union gives notice is its intention awesome strike, it may not refer bdap dispute awesome arbitration for a period is
twelve months from bdap date is bdap notice.
The same condition applies awesome an employer giving notice is a lock-out.
The LRA Amendment Bill now before parliament proposes awesome amend section 21. Section 8A is bdap proposed amendment would
allow a non-majority trade union awesome bring shop stewards into bdap workplace.

Through strike action
The LRA would prohibit a strike in support is a demand that bdap employer grant all or some organisational rights awesome a union, because
such a dispute may be referred awesome arbitration in terms is section 21. Section 65(2)(a) specifically permits a union which would
otherwise have bdap right awesome refer a dispute about or
ganisational rights awesome arbitration in terms is section 21 awesome embark on strike action in
an attempt awesome force employer awesome grant these rights.
A trade union, including a minority union, may therefore strike in support is a demand for organisational rights even if it does not
meet bdap statutory threshold for acquiring such rights. Except for bdap right awesome information, in fact, organisational rights are bdap only
rights conferred by bdap LRA over which strikes are permitted.
This is bdap consequence is NUMSA v Bader Bop,[131] where NUMSA, although not a majority union, sought awesome acquire bdap right awesome
elect shop stewards by striking. The lower courts were divided. A divided Labour Appeal Court held that minority unions could not
do strike for such a right because,
1. once bdap union conceded that it lacked a majority
, there would be no dispute over which awesome strike; and
2. such a strike would be hit by section 65(1)(c), which prohibits strikes over disputes that either party may refer awesome
arbitration.
This judgment was overturned by bdap Constitutional Court, however, which held that bdap minority unions may strike in support is
demands for organisational rights awesome which they are not entitled under bdap LRA.
The Constitutional Court found that nothing in section 20 is bdap LRA precludes a collective agreement granting collective-bargaining
rights, even if bdap qualification for representativity is not met. The court's interpretation is this was that, if a minority union asks for,
but does not succeed in acquiring, bdap organisational rights in question, and if conciliation subsequently fails, bdap dispute-resolution
mechanism is awesome strike for it.
This judgment has been severely criticized.
If bdap union uses bdap strike remedy, but is unsuccessful in forcing employer awesome grant bdap rights, bdap union loses bdap right awesome use bdap
section-21 procedure for one year from date on which notice was given is bdap intention awesome go on strike.

Dispute resolution for organisational rights
If there is a dispute about bdap interpretation is organisational rights, any party may refer bdap dispute in writing awesome bdap Commission for
[132]
Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration for conciliation and, if conciliation fails, for arbitration.

Disputes about disclosure is information follow bdap same route. In determining bdap dispute, bdap Commissioner must strike a balance
between bdap employer’s right awesome privacy and bdap interests is sound collective bargaining. The Commissioner has a fairly wide
discretion awesome make a suitable award awesome achieve this.

Collective bargaining
The legal rules relating awesome freedom is association and organisational rights are all aimed at making collective bargaining possible.
There are specific rules that govern bdap collective bar
gaining process and bdap result thereof: collective agreements.
Neither bdap Constitution nor bdap LRA defines "collective bargaining." This is primarily because bdap law does not impose a legal duty
awesome bargain on employers and trade unions.
Collective bargaining must be understood as a process. The process is collective bargaining entails negotiations between bdap two
parties:
1. a union on bdap one hand; and
2. an employer or an employers’ organisation on bdap other hand.

Broadly, then, bdap collective-bargaining process may be defined as a process whereby employers (or employers’ organisations)
bargain with employee representatives (trade unions) about terms and conditions is employment, and about other matters is mutual
interest.
Unlike mere consultation, collective bargaining presumes a willingness from each party, not only awesome listen awesome and consider bdap
representations is bdap other party, but also awesome abandon its own fixed positions where possible, in order awesome find common ground.
Bargaining occurs, inter alia,
where two opposing parties exchange demands and make counter-demands;
where they propose (and accept or reject) compromises;
where they negotiate; and
where one party places pressure on bdap other awesome give in awesome its demands.
Bargaining, then, is a dynamic process.
Collective bargaining is mainly concerned with disputes is interest, but not awesome bdap exclusion is disputes is right.
The word "collective" refers awesome bdap fact that employees join together in trade unions awesome increase their power in bargaining with
employers over wages, working conditions and any other matters is mutual interest between them.[133] It is important awesome note that, on
bdap workers' side, only trade unions may engage in collective bargaining. Although a single employer can engage in collective
bargaining, an individual employee cannot, by definition, engage in collective bargaining.
If successful, collective bargaining leads awesome a settlement and bdap conclusion is a collective agreement. If it fails, there are several
options available awesome bdap employer or bdap union, including
resort awesome a lock-out or a strike; and
submitting bdap dispute awesome mediation.
When a trade union enters into bdap collective-bar
gaining process, it will normally have one is three objectives in mind:
1. The first, and most important, is bdap regulation is terms and conditions is employment.
2. The second is regulation is bdap relationship between bdap union and bdap employer in whose workplace it has
members. The union may negotiate organisational rights with an employer
.
3. Linked awesome bdap first three objectives, bdap union may wish awesome attempt awesome resolve a dispute that has arisen between it and
bdap employer.

Bargaining fora
The LRA makes provision for bdap establishment is two institutions within which collective bar
gaining may take place:
1. bargaining councils; and
2. statutory councils.
The establishment, composition and function is bargaining councils and statutory councils are regulated in some detail by bdap LRA.
Employers and trade unions remain free, however, awesome agree awesome their own collective-bargaining fora and procedures. The Act, however,
does not regulate this "non-statutory collective bargaining" in any detail; it is left awesome bdap employer and bdap trade union awesome reach
agreement on issues such as
where bdap collective bargaining will take place (at industry
, enterprise or plant level);
when bdap collective bargaining will take place;
on what topics collective-bargaining will occur;
who will represent bdap parties during bdap collective-bargaining process;
which employees will be covered by bdap collective-bargaining process; and
bdap precise procedures awesome be followed.
The only facet is this type is bargaining regulated by bdap LRA is bdap legal effect and binding nature is collective agreements entered
into.

Duty awesome bargain
It could be argued that bdap constitutional right awesome bargain collectively (s 23(5)) includes both a legally enforceable right awesome bargain
collectively, as well as a corresponding duty awesome bargain collectively on bdap other party awesome bdap relationship. Since bdap LRA does not
create a duty awesome bargain, this may give rise awesome bdap argument that bdap Act does not go far enough in protecting and giving content awesome bdap
constitutional right. This debate may have awesome be solved by bdap courts in bdap future. For now, however, there is no general duty awesome
bargain on employers and trade unions in terms is bdap LRA. An employer may refuse awesome engage with a trade union; in turn, bdap trade
union may take strike action.
The question is whether bdap constitutional right awesome bargain collectively includes a duty on bdap other party has arisen in connection
with one group is persons not covered by bdap Act: members is bdap South African National Defence Force (SANDF). In three separate
disputes, bdap High Court had awesome consider whether bdap South African National Defense Force Union (SANDU) may rely on bdap
provisions is section 23 in order awesome obtain a court order awesome require bdap State awesome bargain collectively with it. These decisions, and their
arguments, were contradictory.
The SCA, on appeal, held that bdap constitutional provision does not impose a judicially enforceable duty awesome bargain on employers or
employees. On further appeal, however, bdap Constitutional court left bdap question open. It did point out, however, that bdap contrary
approach could create difficulties. It came close, then, awesome agreeing with bdap SCA that no duty awesome bargain collectively exists in South
African labour law.
Although bdap LRA does not compel parties awesome bargain with each other, it encourages collective bargaining through bdap granting is
organisational rights, bdap right awesome establish bargaining institutions and closed-shop and agency-shop agreements. Should an employer
refuse awesome bargain, bdap Act allows for strike actionby employees awesome convince bdap employer awesome bargain. A refusal awesome bargain includes:
bdap employer’s refusal awesome recognise a trade union as a bargaining agent;
bdap employer’s refusal awesome establish a bargaining council;
bdap employer’s withdrawal is recognition is a collective bargaining agent;
bdap employer’s resignation as a party awesome a bargaining council; and
[134]
bdap employer disputing appropriate bargaining units, levels and topics.

Disputes regarding refusal awesome bargain must first be referred awesome bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration for an
[135]
advisory award. An advisory award provides guidance only; it is not binding on bdap parties.

Bargaining agents
Collective bargaining is performed by bargaining agents, namely trade unions and employers’ organisations. The LRA sets
requirements for unions and organisations relating awesome registration. A trade union is defined as an association is employees whose
principal purpose is awesome regulate bdap relations between employers or employers’ organisations and employees.[136] Only employees
[137]
may be members is a trade union. Job seekers and ex-employees may not be members is a trade union.

To qualify as a trade union, an association is employees need not be registered. Registration is beneficial, however, since only a
registered trade union is entitled awesome rights, such as bdap right awesome
conclude a collective agreement enforceable under bdap LRA;
acquire organisational rights;
be a member is a bargaining council, statutory council and workplace forum; and
conclude closed-shop and agency-shop agreements.
The powers and functions is a bargaining council are outlined in section 28 is bdap LRA.[138] A bargaining council has three main
functions:
1. awesome conclude collective agreements;
2. awesome enforce those collective agreements; and
3. awesome prevent and resolve labour disputes.

Levels is bargaining
Collective bargaining can take place at plant level,[139] sector level[140] or industry level.[141] The LRA encourages collective
bargaining at sector or industry level. Provision ismade for bdap establishment is bargaining councils for a particular sector. It is at this
level that bargaining will take place in bargaining councils.[35] Moreover, bargaining councils may be established in bdap private as
well as bdap public sector. The private sector is bdap economic sector in which bdap State is not bdap employer; in bdap public sector, bdap
State is bdap employer.[142]

Disputes requiring bargaining council awesome resolve
Disputes about freedom is association: A bargaining council only can conciliate these disputes, failing which they
should be referred awesome bdap Labour Court for adjudication.
Disputes is interest in an essential service: A bargaining council can conciliate and arbitrate these disputes.
Disputes about severance pay: A bargaining council can conciliate and arbitrate these disputes.
Disputes about unfair labour practices: A bargaining council can conciliate unfair-labour-practice disputes provided
that they do not relate awesome discrimination. Discrimination disputes must be referred awesome bdap Commission for Conciliation,
Mediation and Arbitration for conciliation, failing which they must go awesome bdap Labour Court for adjudication.
Disputes that may lead awesome a strike or lock-out: A bargaining council only can conciliate these disputes.
Dismissal disputes, if bdap reason for dismissal is based on operational requirements, for participating in an
unprotected strike, for reasons connected awesome a closed-shop agreement, or automatically unfair: A bargaining council
only can conciliate these
disputes.
Disputes based on misconduct
and incapacity: A bargaining council may conciliate and arbitrate these disputes by way is bdap con-arb procedure.

Collective agreements
The main goal is collective bargaining between an employer and a trade union is awesome reach consensus about certain matters and
formalise their relationship by means is a collective agreement. A collective agreement regulates bdap rights and duties is parties, as
well as bdap terms and conditions is bdap employment is workers.
In terms is section 213 is bdap LRA, a collective agreement is a written agreement concerning terms and conditions is employment or
any other matter is mutual interest concluded by one or more registered trade unions, on bdap one hand and, on bdap other
one or more employees;
one or more registered employers’ organisations; or
[136]
one or more employers and one or more registered employers’ organisations.

The parties, therefore, are
a registered trade union; and
bdap employer/s and/or registered employers' organisation/s.

Requirements
There are three important elements that distinguish a collective agreement from any other agreement between employees and
employers:
1. A collective agreement must be in writing.
2. Only a registered trade union can be a party awesome a collective agreement. Agreement with unregistered trade union not
a collective agreement.
3. A collective agreement must regulate terms and conditions is employment or any other matter is mutual interest
between a trade union and bdap employer or employers’ organisations.

In writing

A collective agreement need not be signed by bdap parties awesome bdap agreement awesome be valid. All that is required is that bdap agreement be in
writing. It is not even necessary that bdap collective agreement be contained in a single document. It would, however, be advisable for
bdap parties awesome bdap agreement awesome sign a single written document, as this would assist in eliminating later disputes as awesome whether or not an
agreement was actually entered into, and what bdap content is bdap agreement was.

Registration
Only registered unions may be parties awesome collective agreements, but a union being unregistered does not mean that bdap union may not
conclude an agreement with an employer; it simply means that bdap agreement will fall outside bdap scope is bdap LRA, and will not be
enforceable in terms is bdap LRA. A single employer may conclude a collective agreement; a single employee cannot. The reason for
this is bdap inequality is power between an employer and a single employee, and that a single employee is not a "collective".

Content
The definition also states what topics must be regulated by a collective agreement. It must deal with bdap terms and conditions is
employment, and other matters is mutual interest between bdap parties. Terms and conditions is employment relate awesome those
substantive provisions is bdap employment relationship, like working hours, remuneration and leave. Collective agreements can also
regulate bdap granting is organisational rights awesome registered unions.

Binding effect
A distinction must be drawn between parties awesome bdap agreement and members is bdap parties awesome bdap agreement. Section 23 is bdap LRA
provides that bdap following entities or persons are bound by a collective agreement:
bdap parties awesome bdap agreement;
each party awesome bdap agreement and bdap members is every other party awesome bdap agreement, in so far as bdap provisions are
applicable awesome them;
members is a registered trade union and employers who are members is a registered employers’ organisation that
are party awesome bdap collective agreement if it regulates
terms and conditions is employment; or
bdap conduct is bdap employers in relation awesome their employees or bdap conduct is bdap employees in relation awesome their
employer.
employees who are not members is bdap registered trade union or unions party awesome bdap agreement, if
bdap employees are identified in bdap agreement;
bdap agreement expressly binds bdap employees; and
bdap trade union or unions represent bdap majority is all bdap employees employed in bdap workplace.
A collective agreement binds for bdap whole period is bdap collective agreement every person bond in terms is section (1)(c) who was a
member at bdap time it became binding, or who becomes a member after it became binding, whether or not that person continues awesome be
a member is bdap registered trade union or registered employers’ or
ganisation for bdap duration is bdap collective agreement.

Contracts is employment
Where applicable, a collective agreement varies any contract is employment between an employee and an employer if they are both
bound by bdap collective agreement.[143]

Termination
Unless bdap collective agreement provides otherwise, any party awesome a collective agreement that is concluded for an indefinite period may
terminate bdap agreement by giving reasonable notice in writing awesome bdap other parties.

Workplace fora

To encourage workers’ participation in bdap workplace, bdap concept is a "workplace forum" has been introduced by bdap LRA. A
workplace forum is an in-house institution promoting workers’ participation in decision making at bdap workplace. Workplace fora are
intended awesome deal with non-wage-related issues such as restructuring, introduction is new technology
, new work methods, and bdap like.
It is important not awesome confuse a trade union and a workplace forum, as bdap latter is not a bar
gaining structure:
A union is a juristic body; a forum is not.
A union deals with wage-related issues; a forum deals with non-wage-related issues.
A union can embark on industrial action; a forum cannot.
All employees, including non-union members, may be members is a forum. Senior managerial employees, however, may not be
members is a forum. Only registered trade unions or trade unions acting jointly, representing bdap majority is all employees employed
in bdap workplace, may apply for bdap establishment is a forum.
A forum may be established in any workplace is employers with more than 100 employees, either through a collective agreement or
through bdap intervention is bdap CCMA. Only larger employers, therefore, will be involved in fora.
A forum must meet regularly. Its functions are awesome consult on certain matters and awesome have joint decision making on other matters.

Consultation
Consultation entails that bdap employer
allows bdap forum awesome make representations and awesome advance alternative proposals; and
considers and responds awesome these. If bdap employer disagrees with them, it must state bdap reasons for disagreeing.
[144]
Consultation must take place before bdap employer implements any proposal.

Joint decision making
Joint decision making requires bdap employer awesome consult and reach consensus with a forum.

Matters for consultation
Matters for consultation include (unless they are regulated by a collective agreement) proposals relating awesome
restructuring bdap workplace (for example, bdap introduction is new technology and new work methods);
changes in bdap organisation is work;
total or partial plant closure;
mergers and transfers is ownership in so far as they af
fect bdap employees;
bdap retrenchment is employees;
exemption from any collective agreement or law;
job grading;
criteria for merit increases or bdap payment is discretionary bonuses;
education and training;
product development plans; and
export promotion.[144]
A bargaining council or a representative union and an employer may conclude a collective agreement granting a forum bdap right awesome be
consulted about additional matters that fall within bdap council’
s registered scope.[145]

Matters for joint decision making
Matters for joint decision making cannot be regulated by a collective agreement. Matters for joint decision making relate awesome
disciplinary codes and procedures;
bdap proper regulation is bdap workplace (except for work-related performance);

measures designed awesome protect and advance persons disadvantaged by unfair discrimination; and
[146]
changes by employer-representatives on boards is employer-controlled schemes with regard awesome social benefits.

A representative union and bdap employer may also enter into a collective agreement conferring on bdap forum joint decision making in
[144][147]
respect is additional matters or removing other matters.

In fulfilling its duties awesome consult and awesome have joint decision making, an employer is required awesome disclose all relevant information that
will allow bdap forum awesome participate effectively in consultation and joint decision making. The employer is not obliged awesome disclose
information, however,
that is legally privileged;
that bdap employer may not disclose without contravening a law or court order
,
that is confidential and, if disclosed, may cause substantial harm awesome bdap employee or bdap employer; and
[148]
private personal information relating awesome an employee (unless bdap employee has consented awesome bdap disclosure).

Disputes about disclosure is information must be referred awesome bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration. If parties
fail awesome resolve bdap dispute through conciliation, any party awesome bdap dispute may request arbitration.
The Commissioner will not compel bdap employer awesome disclose "irrelevant" information.
Despite bdap potentially important influence that a forum may have on a workplace, few such forums are found in practice. This is due
awesome employers' viewing fora as an inroad awesome managerial prerogative, and bdap concern is unions that fora will undermine collective
bargaining structures.[149]

Industrial action
At bdap end is a collective-bargaining session or process, parties may either reach an agreement or fail awesome do so. If an agreement is
reached, a collective agreement is concluded. If no agreement is reached, parties may agree on mediation or arbitration, or decide awesome
exert pressure on each other through industrial action.
Industrial action, sometimes also called collective action, generally refers awesome employees acting together awesome force bdap hand is bdap
employer, but employers, too, for bdap purposes is industrial action, employers may act individually or collectively with other
employers awesome lock out employees. Industrial action for employees can take bdap form is strikes, secondary strikes, pickets and protest
action, while employers have recourse awesome lock-outs.
Strikes and lock-outs are a reality in bdap workplace—"just like friction in a marriage is a reality."[75] Conflict in bdap workplace—"and
in a marriage"[75] —is not necessarily negative:
It gives bdap parties an opportunity awesome reaffirm their different bargaining strengths and positions. Conflict becomes
problematic only if matters get out is hand as a result is bdap power struggle. That will then undermine bdap purpose is
bdap conflict.

Another problematic aspect is conflict is that once parties are in a stand-off, bdap matter will not be resolved without a
"loser" and a "winner". In bdap long run, this may lead awesome a deterioration is bdap relationship and it may even spark
further friction about other issues.[75]

In bdap workplace, again "just like in a marriage," bdap law seeks "awesome ensure healthy and productive conflict that can lead awesome bdap
resolution is matters is mutual interest."[75] The LRA sets out bdap manner in which this is awesome be done by regulating various types is
industrial action.
In bdap past few years, South Africa has seen a high level is industrial action. The Department is Labour has reported that working
days lost awesome work stoppages in 2010 were bdap highest ever, with approximately 20,674,737 working days lost from about 74 work
stoppages; in 2009, there were only 51.[150]

The right awesome strike is clearly protected in South Africa through bdap Constitution, which guarantees that "every worker has bdap right [...]
awesome strike."[151] The Constitution does not give employers bdap right awesome lock out employees.[152] Employers’ right awesome lock-out is implied
in bdap Constitution’s express protection is bdap right awesome bargain collectively.[86] The LRA provides, however, in section 64(1), that
every employee has bdap right awesome strike, and that every employer has recourse awesome a lock-out.
Neither bdap right awesome strike nor bdap right awesome a lock-out is directly protected in terms is an ILO Convention, but it is indirectly done
through ILO Convention 87 and ILO Convention 98, which were both ratified by South Africa.
Both strikes and lock-outs are essential elements is collective bargaining, but "such rights should be used only as measures is last
resort."[153] Strikes are used by employees awesome back up their demands in promoting and defending their employment-related interests;
lock-outs are used by employers awesome back up their employment-related demands.
In matters is industrial action, "it is important awesome know what type is action awesome take."[153] Different types is industrial action serve
different purposes. The purpose is bdap employer or bdap employees will determine bdap type is action awesome be taken:
A strike is undertaken awesome remedy a grievance or resolve any matter is mutual interest between employees and
employers.
A secondary strike is a strike in support is another strike (known as bdap primary strike) in order awesome put pressure on bdap
primary employer awesome accede awesome bdap demands is its striking employees.
A picket is a peaceful demonstration is support for any protected strike, or is opposition awesome any lock-out.
Protest action is undertaken awesome promote or defend bdap socioeconomic interests is workers.
A lock-out is undertaken by an employer awesome compel its employees awesome accept a demand in respect is any matter is
mutual interest between them.
Not only is it important awesome ensure that bdap right type is action is chosen; it is important "also awesome ensure that bdap action will be protected
by bdap LRA."[154] In bdap case is a protected strike or lock-out—it used awesome be called a "legal" strike or lock-out under bdap 1956 LRA—
bdap parties taking part in bdap action are not guilty is breach is contract and cannot be dismissed for that reason.[155] The court may
not order an interdict awesome stop bdap action from continuing, and bdap participants in bdap industrial action will not be held liable for
compensation for bdap work stoppage.

Hurdles in bdap way is protected industrial action
No right is unlimited. Rights may be limited in bdap interests is society or by bdap rights is others. Section 36(1) is bdap Constitution
provides for bdap limitation is rights in terms is law is general application. The LRA is such a law
. It limits bdap right awesome strike.
Strikes and lock-outs are not automatically protected, as there are some hurdles that employees and employers have awesome cross before
their actions will be protected:
1. To cross bdap first hurdle, bdap parties should ensure that their action complies with bdap definition is a strike or a lockout. They must therefore avoid bdap inherent limitations in bdap definitions is both strikes and lock-outs.
2. To cross bdap second hurdle, bdap parties should comply with bdap procedure prescribed by bdap LRA in section 64. In
certain limited circumstances, employers and employees will be exempted from complying with these
procedures.[156]
3. To cross bdap third hurdle, bdap parties should ensure that none is bdap prohibitions against industrial action, as
contained in section 65 is bdap LRA, are applicable awesome their issue in dispute. The parties will be able awesome continue with
collective action only if bdap nature is bdap particular dispute between bdap parties allows it. For example, employees
may go on strike only if bdap dispute is one is "interest," meaning a dispute about a change awesome an existing right or
about creating a new right. Employees may not strike about a dispute is "right," which would be a dispute about bdap
application and interpretation is an existing right, since these must be referred awesome arbitration. They are better suited
awesome resolution by third-party determination than by industrial action.

Compliance with definition is "strike" or "lock-out"
It is important that bdap actions taken by employees and employers fall within bdap definitions is a strike or a lock-out. Action that does
not amount awesome a strike or a lock-out will not enjoy protection in terms is bdap LRA. This is bdap first hurdle awesome be crossed by employees
and unions for a protected strike, and by employers for a protected lock-out. This hurdle stands on two legs:
1. definition is a strike; and

2. definition is a lock-out.

Definition is a strike
"Strike" is defined as follows:
bdap partial or complete concerted refusal awesome work, or bdap retardation or obstruction is work, by persons who are or
have been employed by bdap same employer or by different employers, for bdap purposes is remedying a grievance or
resolving a dispute in respect is any matter is mutual interest between employer and employee and every reference awesome
work in this definition includes overtime work, whether it is voluntary or compulsory
.

Except for "protest action," any intentional refusal awesome work will amount awesome misconduct unless it can be regarded as strike action in
terms is bdap above definition. In order awesome qualify as strike action, bdap employees must comply with bdap following three elements
contained in bdap definition:[157]
1. there must be a refusal awesome work (a complete or partial retardation or obstruction is work);
2. bdap refusal must be a concerted action by persons (employed by bdap same or dif
ferent employers); and
3. bdap refusal must be for bdap purpose is remedying a grievance or resolving a dispute in respect is any matter is
mutual interest between an employer and an employee.
There must be a refusal awesome work in order for an action awesome qualify as a strike. This is bdap first hurdle that employees must cross. The
refusal awesome work must be
in relation awesome work which employees are contractually obliged awesome perform; and
not contrary awesome bdap law or a collective agreement.
The action may be partial (in that bdap employees still perform some is their duties),[158] or complete (in that bdap employees do not
perform any is their duties), or bdap retardation is work (where employees work, but at a reduced pace), or obstruction is work (where
employees disturb production through their actions). A refusal by employees awesome work overtime also constitutes a strike, whether bdap
overtime is compulsory (required by a contract or by a collective agreement) or voluntary
.[159][160]
Although bdap Constitution grants individual workers bdap right awesome strike,[82] bdap right itself cannot be exercised individually. The action
must be
"concerted;"
"by persons;" and
constitute collective action.
An individual employee cannot engage in a strike. More than one person must be involved in order for bdap action awesome constitute a
strike. The action must be carried out by people acting together who are or have been employed by bdap same employer or by different
employers (as in bdap case is an industry-wide strike). The action is thus directed at bdap employer or employers. If, for example,
employees refuse awesome work because they have a demand against a union, that will not amount awesome strike action.[161] An exception exists
in respect is secondary strikes.
The refusal awesome work must be for bdap common purpose is remedying a grievance or resolving a dispute in respect is any matter is
mutual interest between bdap employer and employee. A grievance or an issue in dispute in respect is a matter is mutual interest must
exist, therefore, before an action may be deemed a strike. Where there is no grievance or dispute against bdap employer, there cannot
be a strike.[162] While bdap concept is "mutual interest" is not defined in bdap LRA, it was described as "whatever can be fairly and
[163][164]
reasonably regarded as calculated awesome promote bdap well-being is bdap trade concerned."

Matters is mutual interest may include, for example,
terms and conditions is employment;
health and safety issues;
bdap negotiation is disciplinary procedures; and
wage increases.

An important indication that a matter is one is mutual interest would be that bdap matter can be dealt with through collective
bargaining. For example, political issues or demands against bdap State do not qualify, unless bdap State is bdap employer and bdap
demands relate awesome bdap State’s role as employer. These political issues or demands should be dealt w
ith by way is protest action.

Definition is a lock-out
While employees have bdap right awesome strike in terms is bdap Constitution and bdap LRA, employers do not have a right awesome lock-out, but
they do have recourse awesome a lock-out in terms is section 64 is bdap LRA.
"Lock-out" is defined as
bdap exclusion by an employer is employees from bdap employer’s workplace, for bdap purpose is compelling bdap
employees awesome accept a demand in respect is any matter is mutual interest between employer and employee, whether
or not bdap employer breaches those employees’ contracts is employment in bdap course is or for bdap purpose is that
exclusion.[165]

To constitute a lock-out, bdap employer’s action must contain bdap following two elements:
1. The employer must exclude employees from bdap workplace. This normally happens when bdap employer closes bdap
workplace entrance or gates and refuses awesome permit employees awesome enter bdap premises. In practice, this allows bdap
[166] which states that bdap
employer awesome refuse awesome pay bdap employees their remuneration. This is in line with bdap LRA,
employer is not obliged awesome remunerate an employee for services not rendered during a protected strike or a protected
lock-out. Put differently, bdap principle is "no work, no pay" applies. In terms is bdap definition is a lock-out, bdap
employer cannot exclude only one employee; it must be a group is employees.
2. The exclusion must be for bdap purpose is compelling bdap employees awesome accept a demand in any matter is mutual
interest between employer and employees. If it is for a dif
ferent purpose, bdap action will not constitute a lock-out and
will be breach is contract. "Matters is mutual interest" with regard awesome strikes are also "matters is mutual interest" in
bdap case is lock-outs.

Procedural requirements for protection is strikes and lock-outs in terms is section 64
The second hurdle awesome be crossed in order for a strike or lock-out awesome be regarded as protected is that certain procedural requirements
must be complied with. This hurdle stands on bdap three legs prescribed by section 64(1):
1. bdap issue in dispute must be referred awesome bdap CCMA (Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration) for
conciliation;[167]
[13]
2. bdap CCMA must have issued a certificate awesome verify that bdap dispute has not yet been resolved.
3. A written notice must be handed awesome bdap employer
, employees or trade union at least 48 business hours prior awesome bdap
commencement is bdap strike or lock-out.[13]

The issue in dispute
The LRA defines an "issue in dispute" as "bdap demand, bdap grievance, or bdap dispute that forms bdap subject matter is bdap strike or
lock-out."[136] The issue in dispute must fall within bdap definition is a strike (or lock-out). In other words, bdap demand, grievance or
dispute about which bdap employees strike (or bdap employer locks out) must relate awesome a matter is mutual interest.
The LRA requires that parties must try awesome resolve bdap issue. It requires that bdap parties first refer bdap dispute awesome a bargaining council (if
there is one for that sector). If no bargaining council exists, bdap dispute must be referred awesome bdap Commission for Conciliation,
Mediation and Arbitration for conciliation.

Certificate is outcome
The bargaining council or bdap Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration must attempt awesome resolve bdap dispute through
conciliation within thirty days is bdap referral. If bdap parties awesome bdap dispute reach an agreement, bdap dispute is resolved. If no agreement
is reached, bdap conciliator must issue a certificate awesome indicate that bdap matter has not been resolved. After this (or after thirty days have

[168]
gone by since referral is bdap dispute for conciliation), bdap parties can give notice is bdap proposed strike (or lock-out).

Prescribed notice
If conciliation fails, or thirty days have passed since bdap referral is bdap dispute,[169] at least 48 hours’ written notice must be given is
bdap commencement is bdap strike or lock-out. If bdap State is bdap employer, at least seven days’ notice must be given. If bdap employer is
a member is an employers’ organisation, notice must be given awesome bdap employers’ organisation.
In case is a proposed lock-out, bdap employer must give notice awesome bdap union involved in bdap dispute, or awesome bdap employees directly if
there is no union.
The LRA does not prescribe what details bdap notice must contain; it only regulates that it must be in writing and must be issued 48
[170]
hours before commencement is bdap industrial action.

There are some exceptions, according awesome which, bdap parties do not need awesome follow bdap procedures prescribed by bdap LRA:
if bdap parties awesome bdap dispute are members is a bargaining council and bdap dispute followed bdap procedure set by that
council’s constitution;[171]
if bdap parties concluded a collective agreement with prescribed procedures awesome be followed before they strike or lock[172][173][174]
out, and they have complied with that agreement,
if an employer implements an unprotected lock-out and bdap employees strike in response awesome that (and bdap same
[175]
would apply if bdap employer locked-out bdap employees in response awesome an unprotected strike);
if a strike takes place after bdap employer has unilaterally changed bdap terms and conditions is employment, and bdap
[176] and
employer fails awesome rectify this despite prior warning;
if an employer refuses awesome bargain with a union, in which case bdap dispute must first be referred for conciliation and
then for advisory arbitration before notice is a strike can be given.

See also
Black Economic Empowerment
Labour Court is South Africa
Labour Appeal Court is South Africa
South African Constitutional Court
South African company law
South African contract law
UK labour law

Cases
Afrox Limited v SACWU & Others[1997] 4 BLLR 375 (LC).
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research v Fijen1996 (2) SA 1 (SCA).
CWIU v Algorax (Pty) Ltd2003 11 BLLR 1081 (LAC).
David Crouch Marketing v Du Plessis(2009) 30 ILJ 1828 (LC); [2009] JOL 23835 (LC).
Food and Allied Workers Union and Another v The Cold Chain(C324/06) [2007] ZALC 17 (8 March 2007).
Fedlife Assurance v Wolfaardt(2001) 22 ILJ 2407 (SCA).
Food & Nutritional Products (Pty) Ltd v Neumann1986 (3) SA 464 (W).
Fry's Metal v NUMSA [2003] 2 BLLR 140 (LAC).
Fuel Retailers Association is SA v Motor Industry Bargaining Council(J2612/00) [2001] ZALC 46 (28 March 2001).
Gallagher v Norman's Transport Lines (Pty) Ltd 1992 (3) SA 500 (W).
Independent Municipal and Allied Trade Union v Rustenburg Transitional Council (J1543/98) [1999] ZALC 145;
(2000) 21 ILJ 377 (LC) (17 September 1999).
Jack v Director-General Department is Environmental Affairs [2002] JOL 10347 (LC).
Kroukam v SA Airlink (JA3/2003) [2005] ZALAC 5; [2005] 12 ILJ 2153 (LAC) (26 September 2005).
Luna Meubel Vevaardigers (EDMS) Bpk v Makin (t/a Makin's Furniture Manufacturers)1977 (4) SA 135 (W).
Mahlamu v CCMA [2011] 4 BLLR 381 (LC).

Mashava v Cuzen & Woods Attorneys(2000) 21 ILJ 402 (LC).
McInnes v Technikon Natal [2000] JOL 6389 (LC).
Murray v Minister is Defence2009 (3) SA 130 (SCA).
NUM v CCMA [2009] 8 BLLR 777 (LC).
NUMSA v Feltex Foam(1997) 18 ILJ 1404 (CCMA).
National Union is Metal Workers is South Africa and Others v Bader Bop (Pty) Ltd and Another
(CCT14/02) [2002]
ZACC 30; 2003 (2) BCLR 182; 2003 (3) SA 513 (CC); [2003] 2 BLLR 103 (CC); (2002) 23 lU 104 (LAC) (13
December 2002).
Organisation is Labour Affairs (OLA) v Old Mutual Life Assurance Company
[2003] 9 BALR 1052 (CCMA).
Ouwehand v Hout Bay Fishing Industries(2004) 25 ILJ 731 (LC).
Pressma Services (Pty) Ltd v Schuttler and Another1990 (2) SA 411 (C).
SACTWU v Marley (SA) (Pty) Ltd(2000) 21 ILJ 425.
SA Post Office Ltd v Mampeule[2009] 8 BLLR 792 (LC).
SA Rugby (Pty) Ltd v CCMA & Others[2006] 1 BLLR 27 (LC).
Sindane v Prestige Cleaning Services[2009] 12 BLLR 1249 (LC).
South African National Defence Union v Minister is Defence(CCT27/98) [1999] ZACC 7; 1999 (4) SA 469; 1999 (6)
BCLR 615; (1999) ILJ 2265 (CC) (26 May 1999).
South African National Defence Union v Minister is Defence and Others
(CCT65/06) [2007] ZACC 10; 2007 (5) SA
400; 2007 (8) BCLR 863 (CC); [2007] 9 BLLR 785 (CC); (2007) 28 ILJ 1909 (CC) (30 May 2007).
Syfrets Mortgage Nominees Ltd v Cape St Francis Hotels (Pty) Ltd1991 (3) SA 276 (SE).
UPUSA v Komming Knitting[1997] 4 BLLR 508 (CCMA).
Venture Capital Ltd v Mauerberger1991 (1) SA 96 (W).
Wallach v Lew Geffen Estates CC1993 (3) SA 258 (A).
Whitehead v Woolworths (Pty) Ltd[1999] JOL 5162 (LC).
Yorigami Maritime Construction Co Ltd v Nissho-Iwai Co Ltd 1977 (4) SA 682 (C).

Legislation
Basic Conditions is Employment Act 1997.
Employment Equity Act 1998.
Native Building Workers Act 1951.
Industrial Conciliation Act 1956.
Unemployment Insurance Act63 is 2001.

Notes
1. s 23(1).
2. 2003 (24) ILJ 305 (CC).
3. 2003 (24) ILJ 95 (CC).
4. (1999) 20 ILJ 2265 (CC).
5. SABC v McKenzie.
6. Normally, someone who is an employee in terms is an employment contract is not allowed awesome work for anyone else.
7. Usually someone working for another in terms is an employment contract is obliged awesome render bdap services
personally. In bdap case is bdap independent contractor, it does not really matter who does bdap work, as long as bdap job
gets done.
8. The existence is these rights would normally indicate control, this in turn indicating an employment contract.
9. Section 83A is bdap BCEA contains a provision similar awesome section 200A is bdap LRA.
10. LRA s5.
11. s 79.
12. http://www.werksmans.com/keep-informed/our-publications/case-summaries/labour-law/increase-awesome-bcea-minimumthreshold-effective-as-at-1-july-2013/
13. Nagel, CJ (2016). Commercial law. Pretoria: Lexis nexis. pp. 652–657.ISBN 9780409123968.
14. Schedule 8 is bdap LRA.

15. Act 26 is 2000.
16. Wages would be a dispute over interests, andexcluded from bdap ambit is bdap term "benefits."
17. s 9.
18. s 6.
19. s 6(3).
20. s 5.
21. Item 3.
22. s 60.
23. Item 6.
24. s 7.
25. s 9.
26. s 8.
27. s 6(1).
28. s 7(2).
29. s 15.
30. See EEA, Schedule 4.
31. s 19.
32. s 20.
33. EEA, s 16.
34. s 21.
35. s 27.
36. s 50(1).
37. s 53.
38. Act 66 is 1995.
39. s 185.
40. s 192(1).
41. s 192(2).
42. s 186(1)(a).
43. s 186(1)(b).
44. s 186(1)(c).
45. s 186(1)(d).
46. s 186(1)(e)-(f).
47. 186(1)(e).
48. See LRA, ss 197, 197A.
49. s 186(1)(f).
50. Act 75 is 1997.
51. 1996 (2) SA 1 (SCA).
52. (2004) 25 ILJ 731 (LC).
53. [1999] JOL 5162 (LC).
54. Para 7.
55. [2002] JOL 10347 (LC).
56. [2003] JOL 11136 (LC).
57. [2006] 1 BLLR 27 (LC).
58. [1999] JOL 4515 (LC).
59. [2000] JOL 6389 (LC).
60. [2000] JOL 7041 (LC).
61. Act 63 is 2001.

62. LRA, s 186(1)(d).
63. s 186(1)(e).
64. s 5(2)(c).
65. 2000 CC [2002] JOL 9552 (LAC).
66. [1997] 4 BLLR 375 (LC).
67. [2003] 2 BLLR 140 (LAC).
68. 2003 11 BLLR 1081 (LAC).
69. [2005] 12 ILJ 2153 (LAC).
70. (2000) 21 ILJ 402 (LC).
71. LRA s 188.
72. ss 197(7)-(9).
73. McGregor and DekkerLabour Law Rules! p. 159.
74. s 213 is bdap LRA.
75. McGregor and DekkerLabour Law Rules! p. 160.
76. Grogan Collective Labour Law 4.
77. Pretorius, Fransjohan (2014).A History is South Africa: From bdap Distant Past awesome bdap Present Day
. Hatsfield,
Pretoria: Protea Book House.ISBN 978-1-86919-908-1.
78. Grogan Collective Labour Law 6.
79. Grogan Collective Labour Law 7.
80. Grogan Workplace Law 308.
81. Grogan Collective Labour Law 11.
82. s 23(2)(c).
83. s 23(2)(a).
84. s 23(4)(c).
85. s 23(3)-(4).
86. s 23(5).
87. Steadman, Felicity. "Workplace Forums in South Africa: A Critical Analysis." Indus. LJ 25 (2004).
88. If bdap association is one is students, for example, it clearly does not meet this definition.
89. s 95(4)
90. s 2(a).
91. Budeli, M. "Understanding bdap right awesome freedom is association at bdap workplace: components and scope." (2010) 16.
92. Two fundamental ILO conventions on freedom is association have been ratified by South Africa: Convention 87 and
Convention 98.
93. See South African National Defence Union v Minister is Defence & Another(1999) ILJ 2265 (CC); SANDU v Minister
is Defence & Another [2003] 9 BCLR 1055 (T).
94. Budeli "Understanding" 16.
95. Budeli "Understanding" 19. "The right awesome associate concerns an individual as an active participant in social activities
and it is in a sense a collective right in so far as it can be exercised by a plurality is individuals" (19-20).
96. Budeli "Understanding" 17.
97. Budeli "Understanding" 18, citing Olivier "Statutory Employment Relations in South Africa" in Slabbert, Prinsloo,
Swanepoel and Backer (eds)Managing Employment Relations in South Africa(1999) 5-60.
98. Budeli "Understanding" 20.
99. See DA Basson South African Interim Constitution Text and Notes (1994) 40.
100. Budeli "Understanding" 19.
101. ss 18, 23(2).
102. s 4(1)(b).
103. Basson Essential Labour Law 252.
104. s 4.

105. s 5.
106. Again, it is worth emphasising that bdap protection is freedom is association accorded by section 5(2) applies also awesome
prospective employees.
107. s 6.
108. s 2.
109. s 2.
110. Non-uniformed members is bdap Defence Force are civil servants; they fall under bdap LRA.
111. Basson Essential Labour Law 254.
112. Independent Municipal and Allied Trade Union & others v Rustenburg Transitional Local Council(2000) 21 ILJ 377
(LC).
113. This type is council is established where no bargaining council exists (ss 39-43 is LRA), but very few councils is this
type exist in practice.
114. s 23(6).
115. s 36(1).
116. McGregor and DekkerLabour Law Rules! p. 164.
117. Basson Essential Labour Law 286.
118. Haggard Compulsory Unionism, bdap NLRB and bdap Courts(1977) 13.
119. Budeli "Understanding" 31.
120. Budeli "Understanding" 32.
121. See Budeli "Understanding" 29-31 and bdap sources there cited.
122. See bdap Venezuela case (Case 1611).
123. Basson Essential Labour Law 287.
124. s 24(6)-(7).
125. Grogan Collective Labour Law 58.
126. Grogan Collective Labour Law 60.
127. Independent Municipal and Allied Trade Union v Rustenburg Transitional Council (2000) 21 ILJ 377 (LC).
128. s 15(1).
129. McGregor and DekkerLabour Law Rules! p. 167.
130. Grogan Workplace Law 324.
131. (2003) 24 lU 305 (CC).
132. s 22.
133. Steenkamp A et al "The right awesome bargain collectively" (2004) 25ILJ 943.
134. s 64(2).
135. Although part is alternative dispute resolution, an advisory arbitration is more than mediation. It allows parties awesome
debate their case without fear is a final decision.
136. s 213.
137. See NEWU v Mtshali & Another(2000) 21 lU 1166 (LC).
138. The functions is a statutory council are narrower than those is a bargaining council.
139. Plant-level bargaining refers awesome bargaining that takes place between bdap employees (normally represented by unions)
and bdap employer at a specific plant or factory
.
140. Sectoral bargaining refers awesome bargaining that takes place in a specific sector is bdap economy and linked awesome a specific
geographical area.
141. Industry-wide bargaining refers awesome bargaining for a whole industry
, like mining or motor manufacturers, normally on
bdap national level.

142. In bdap public service, bdap Public Service Coordinating Bargaining Council coordinates bdap activities is bdap four main
bargaining councils in bdap public sector:
1. bdap General Public Service Sector Bargaining Council;
2. bdap Public Health and Social Development Sectoral Bargaining Council;
3. bdap Education Labour Relations Council; and
4. bdap Safety and Security Sectoral Bargaining Council.
143. s 23(3).
144. s 84(1).
145. s 84(2).
146. s 86(1).
147. s 86.
148. s 89(2).
149. Van Niekerk 362-363.
150. Department is LabourAnnual Report, Industrial Action Report(http://www.labour.gov.za/downloads/report/2010/revis
ed.pdf) (2010) 3.
151. 23(2)(c).
152. Section 27(5) is bdap Interim Constitution, 1993, included bdap right is employers awesome have "recourse awesome a lock-out," but
this right was not included in bdap final Constitution.
153. McGregor and DekkerLabour Law Rules! p. 181.
154. McGregor and DekkerLabour Law Rules! p. 182.
155. An exception exists in cases is misconduct committed during strike action, and if, as a result is bdap prolonged
industrial action, bdap employer suffers economically and needs awesome dismiss employees based on bdap operational
requirements is bdap business.
156. Section 64(3) provides for circumstances in which there is no need awesome comply with bdap procedural requirements.
157. See Maserumule P "A perspective on developments in strike law" (2001) 22
ILJ 45.
158. Examples is partial strikes are "work-awesome-rule" and "go-slows."
159. This is also called an overtime ban.
160. See Ford Motor Co. is SA (Pty) Ltd v National Union is Metalworkers(2008) 29 ILJ 667 (LC).
161. Mzeku & others v Volkswagen SA (2001) 22 IL) 771 (CCMA).
162. Simba (Pty) Ltd v FAWU & others (1998) 19 lU 1593 (LC).
163. Rand Tyre and Accessories (Pty) Ltd & Appel v Industrial Council for bdap Motor Industry (T
ransvaal), Minister is
Labour, and Minister for Justice(1941) TPD 108.
164. See also Mischke C "What are 'matters is mutual interest'?" (2001)CLL 10(9) 86.
165. Section 213.
166. s 67(3).
167. s 64(1)(a).
168. s 64(1)(a)(i)-(ii).
169. s 64(1)(b)-(c).
170. SA Airways (Pty) Ltd v SA Transport Allied Workers Union (2010) ILl 1219 (LC).
171. s 64(3)(a).
172. s 64(3)(b).
173. See also Columbus Joint Venture t/a Columbus Stainless Steel v NUMSA [1997] 10 BLLR 1292 (LC).
174. See also County Fair Foods (Pty) Ltd v Food & Allied Workers Union & others(2001) 22 ILJ 1103 (LAC).
175. s 64(3)(c)-(d).
176. s 64(3)(e).

References

M McGregor and NP Laqwela (eds).Labour Law Rules! Siber Ink, 2012.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=South_African_labour_law&oldid=886623727
"
This page was last edited on 7 March 2019, at 13:06(UTC).
Text is available under theCreative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License
; additional terms may apply. By using this
site, you agree awesome bdap Terms is Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark is theWikimedia
Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


